Perhaps the simplest way of doing relation
extraction is using hand built patterns.
Let's look at the intuition. Here's a
sentence. Agar is a substance prepared
from a mixture of red algae such as
Gelidium for laboratory or industrial use.
Perhaps you like me I didn't know what the
word Gelidium meant. But I can learn what
it means from this sentence. And the way
we know is that we see this phrase red
algae such as Gelidium. So that tells us
that Gelidium is a kind of red algae. And
this intuition from an early paper by
Marty Hurst suggested that there's in fact
a lot of patterns that can be used to
suggest that two entities are in this is a
or [inaudible] relation. So for example,
knowing if I saw red algae such as
Gelidium, that tells us that Gelidium is a
kind of red algae, so X is a kind of Y. I
might see other patterns, then, like,
Gelidium or other red algae, or Gelidium
and other red algae or, red algae
including Gelidium. In each case, I have
textual pattern, holding between two
entities. That?s a strong queue, that what
I have here, is a particular relation,
between the two entities. [sound]. And
Hirsch showed that these kind of patterns
were able to learn the ISA relation
between, new terms such as bombard and
dong, and [inaudible] bold. Or learning
about author names. Or learning country
names and so on. That could be added to a
database. Now the same kind of intuition
about using hand-written rules to learn
relations can be used for the rich
relations that we've been looking at,
richer than just ISA or Hypenem. And the
intuition for learning these more. Which
are rules are that these relationships
often between specific entities. So the
location located in relation often holds
between an organization and a location,
where the founding relation holds between
a person and a organization. So in
addition to just coming up with clever
string patterns that might indicate a
relation, we can also use facts about the
actual entities that were involved and
that will help us learn which kind of
relations we might have. And we're gonna
start with the Bentley tags and that's
gonna help us do relation extraction. Now
many of these aren't quite enough and to
see this let's look at a couple of
examples Imagine I have an entity drug and
an entity disease, what kind of relations
can hold between those entities? Well, a
lot, we could, a drug could cure a
disease, it could prevent a disease, it
could even cause a disease. And that's
true for any kinds of entities between a
person and their organization. The person
could be the founder of the organization.
There could be an investor in the
organization, a member of the
organization, an employee of, of the
organization, it could be the president of
the organization. So any kind of relation
may hold between these entities although
there are constraints so the person can't
cure, can't be the cure or the disease
cause or other kinds of things. There's
there are constraints from these entities
but lots of other relations meet those
constraints. And so, we're gonna combine
these two intuitions using a pattern and
using the name entities. So, we can
combine these two intuitions, use of the
named entity and use of specific patterns
to extract richer relations. Consider the
question, who holds what office in what
organization. So we'd like to extract from
a sentence like, George Marshal, secretary
of state of the United States, that a
person, George Marshal. Played the role or
had the, had the office of Secretary of
State in an organization in the United
States government. And so we have an
entity person an entity position and an
entity organization and here's a patter,
person comma. Position of organization
that might extract from a sentence like
this. The position of relation between a
person and an organization. And we might
need to have another pattern for sentences
of a different form. So here we have,
person Truman appointed marshal secretary
of state, so we might have person,
appointed, or some other word like named,
or chose, and so on. Person. Position and
we might have an option of preposition in
between so Truman appointed Marshal as
secretary of state will be an option there
or just Truman appointed Marshal secretary
of state. So again a combination of
patterns with maybe list of possible words
that we might get from a thesaurus or some
kind of thing and the named entities of
the, of the entities. Or finding another
pattern. George Marshal was named US
Secretary of State. So again person maybe
a form of word to be and optionally
followed by again one of these named or
appointed words and maybe an optional
preposition and then the organization and
the position. So by combining the named
entity types with the words or perhaps
parts of speech in between we can create
patterns that extract particular
relations. Now an advantage of the pattern
extraction algorithm for doing relation
extraction, is that these human patterns
tend to be high precision. If you look at
a particular domain and you write rules
and the rules are usually pretty high
precision, and they can be tailored to
these very specific domains if you have a
particular relation extraction task when
you write rules, they can, they can get
this high precision. The minuses are that
human patterns tend to be low recall.
Often, you don't think of a particular way
somebody might have thought to word a
certain sentence in free text that
expresses a relation and it's also a lot
of work to do this, especially if you have
a lot of relations. You're gonna have to
come up with very specific patterns for
each relation and for each domain in this
relation and it would be nice to also get
a higher accuracy than you can get from
these relations. So, while hand-built
patterns are useful method for relation
extraction, we're gonna look at other
methods like supervised and unsupervised
methods as well. So handwritten rules with
numentity patterns and other kinds of
words and parts of speech in between are a
good way to extract relations. They have
some problems of accuracy and have
generalizing to new domains. And so we're
going to also introduce other methods of
relation extraction like supervised and
unsupervised learning.
