All right now, in the previous segment we
saw how to compute PPMI, Positive
Pointwise Mutual Information. In this
segment we'll see how to take those values
and compute similarity between words.
First let's talk about a different kind of
context than just word context. A common
way to define context is to use syntax.
And this again relates back to early
linguistic arguments that the meaning has
to do with the restriction of combination
of entities grammatically. So in other
words, two words are similar if they have
similar parse contexts. And we haven't
talked a lot about parsing but to give you
the intuition. The words duty and the word
responsibility, can both be modified by
similar adjectives. So you can have
additional duty, administrative duty,
assumed duty or additional responsibility,
administrative responsibility, assumed
responsibility. And they can also be
objects of similar verbs. Assert duty,
assign a duty, assume a duty, assign a
responsibility, assume a responsibility. So
it's not just that they have similar words
around them, but that their grammatical
context can be similar. They have similar
parse contexts. And we can capture this by
using co-occurrence vectors that are based
on syntactic dependencies. So we say that
the context instead of being counts
of words with previous ten words or
following ten words, the context instead
are, how many times I have a particular
word as my subject or how many times I
have a particular word as my adjectival
modifier. So here's an example
from Dekang Lin. We have the word sell
and we say, how often was this the subject
of the verb absorb? Well, once. How often
was it the subject of the verb adapt? How
about the subject of the verb behave? How
about the prepositional object of the verb
inside? So we can get our counts for each
of these contexts. And now our vector is
determined not by the counts of words that
occur within ten words of me, but
counts of times I occur in a particular
grammatical relation with a context.
And just as we saw with word counts, we can
use PMI or PPMI to our dependency
relations. So the intuition comes from
early work by Don Hindle. If I count in a
corpus, and I parse the corpus and I see
that the verb drink has the object it
three times and it has I drink anything
three times, I drink wine twice, I drink
liquid twice and so on. Well, drink it, or
drink anything, are in fact more common
than drink wine. But we'd like to say that
wine is a more drinkable thing than it.
If I found wine occurring a lot with a verb,
two different verbs, I would think that
those verbs are probably similar. More
than if I found "it" occurring as the
object of the two verbs. And if I compute
the PMI's, the PMI between the object of
the verb and the verb drink, now I see that
wine and tea and liquid have a higher PMI
than it or anything. So if I sort by PMI,
now I see that tea and liquid and wine are
the most associated words to be the object
of the verb drink. So PMI used for noun
associations, just for words in the
context, excuse me, for word associations
of words in the context and also for
associations for dependency relations.
All right. Now we've seen how to
compute the term context or word context
matrix, how to weight it with PMI, and we
talked about computing in two ways, based
on just words that are in my neighborhood
of ten words, or whether I'm in a
particular syntactic or grammatical
relationship with words. Now we're ready to
use those to compute the actual
similarity. And the cosine metric we're
going to use just the same cosine that we
saw from information retrieval. So
remember we had a dot product, we said
that the cosine similarity between two
vectors, two vectors indicating the counts
of words, is just the dot product between
the similarity is the dot product between
the two words normalized by the length of
the two vectors. So the dot product V·W
over length of V times length of W.
Or, we could compute, think of it as computing
separate unit vectors, the normalizing V
by its length, normalizing W by its length
to get unit vectors and just multiplying
them together; or we can compute the whole
thing out. So here's our dot product for
each dimension of V and each dimension of
W we multiply the values together and then
we normalize by the square root of the sum
squared values to get the length of the
vectors. And, now, let's say we're doing
PPMI so V sub I is the PPMI value for word
V in context I, and W sub I is the PPMI
value for word W in context I. And,
remember that cosine as a metric. If two
vectors are orthogonal, they're gonna have
a cosine of zero. If they point in
opposite directions, they'll have a cosine
of minus one. If they point in the same
direction, they'll have a cosine of
plus one. And it turns out that raw
frequency or PPMI are non-negative.
They're always zero or greater. So that
means that the cosine range is always zero
to one; we're always on this part of the,
of the slope. So cosine as a similarity
metric, if we use PPMI weighted counts,
we're gonna get, or raw frequency for that
matter, we're gonna get a number between
zero and one. So let's compute, use
cosine to compute similarity. And I've
taken a little subset of the example we
saw earlier. So we have apricot, digital,
and information. And we have the context
vector. We have large, data, and computer.
And I'm just going to use counts here
instead of PPMI values, just for, for
making the example more simple to see, but
in real life of course, we'd use PPMI. So
the cosine between apricot and
information is the dot product. So, from
apricot to information we have one times one,
plus zero times six, plus zero times
one. Or one plus zero plus zero. Over the
square root of the length of apricot, one
squared plus zero squared plus zero squared,
over the length of information, one squared 
plus six squared plus one squared.
And, that's gonna be one over the square 
root of 38 or .16. And similarly the cosine
between digital and information. We have 
from digital to information, we have
zero times one plus one times six plus two
times one. So that's gonna be zero plus
six plus two over the square root of the
length of digital so that's, the length of digital
I'm sorry. So that's the square root of zero 
squared plus one squared plus two squared.
So, root of zero plus one plus four 
and then the length of information,
the same as we saw before, and now 
we get .58. And, similarly for apricot
and digital. Now the dot product between 
apricot and digital, one time zero,
zero times one, zero times two is zero, 
so we're gonna get a similarity of zero.
There are a number of possible similarity 
metrics, besides cosine, we can use
the Jaccard method, that we saw earlier 
in information retrieval, the Dice metric,
or there's a family of information theoretic 
methods like Jensen-Shen and divergence
that can be also used for similarity, but 
cosine is probably the most popular.
Similarity for distributional methods is 
evaluated just the same as it is for
thesaurus based methods. Either intrinsic 
evaluation, where we compute its correlation
with some human number, human word 
similarity number, or extrinsically
we pick some task like taking the TOEFL 
exam or detecting spelling errors, where
we can compute some error rate and now 
we see if our similarity metric
results in a better error rate.
In summary, distributional similarity metrics 
use a method of association, like PPMI,
and a metric for similarity, like cosine, 
to give you a similarity between two words.
And distributional and thesaurus based methods
both very useful in deciding if two words
are similar for any NLP application.
