Welcome back. In this lecture we begin to
talk about word meaning, and how to decide
if two words have the same meaning. 
Let's look at some fundamentals.
You may remember from an earlier lecture 
we talked about the difference between
lemmas and word forms. A lemma is a 
citation form: it has the same stem,
the same part of speech, same rough semantics. 
Where a word form is the inflected word
as it appears in text. So for example, 
the word form banks has a lemma bank,
the word form sung has a lemma sing, 
and this is of course true for all languages.
The, in Spanish word duermes has the 
lemma dormir. The you sleep and to sleep.
Now each lemma can have multiple meanings. 
So, for example, the word, the lemma bank
We can have a sentence like a bank can 
hold the investments, or, the east bank.
So here we have some kind of financial 
institution and here some kind of sloping land.
So we call this difference sense, we say a
sense or a word sense is a discrete
representation of the aspects of a word meaning. 
And so we wanna say that lemma bank here
has two senses or at least two senses:
sense one this financial institution,
and sense two, this sloping land.
The word homonymy means the situation 
in which words share a form but have
distinct unrelated meanings. We call the 
two words homonyms, homonyms, homonymy.
So bank one, financial institution and bank 
two, sloping land are homonyms.
Similarly, bat one, a club for hitting a ball, 
and bat two, a nocturnal flying mammal,
are homonyms. Now homonyms come in 
two forms. They can be homographs
that's words that are spelled the same 
whether or not they are pronounced
the same or differently so
bank and bat are homographs.
Or they can be homophones. So, write and
right sound the same,
but they're spelled differently. And so 
sometimes homonyms are both
homographs and homophones, so bank and 
bat are both homographs and homophones,
sometimes they're only pronounced 
the same but spelled differently.
Sometimes they're only spelled the same 
but pronounced differently.
Homonymy causes a number of problems 
for applications in natural language processing.
So if you are doing information retrieval and 
you ask about bat care, we don't know
if you have a pet flying mammal or 
if you're a baseball fan.
And machine translation, a similar 
problem. If you say the English word bat,
in Spanish you might mean the flying mammal 
or again you might mean a baseball club.
Text to speech, the instrument, the stringed
instrument called a bass is pronounced
differently than the fish called a bass. 
So if we're going to read a word out loud
in text to speech we have to know 
which word we are talking about.
So consider these two senses of the word 
bank: The bank was constructed in 1875
out of local red brick, and,
I withdrew my money from the bank.
Are those the same sense? You might call 
sense two a financial institution.
So I withdrew my money from
this financial institution and sense one
something about the building. So here this,
when I say this bank was constructed
I really mean the building associated with
the bank. So these two senses,
the financial institution and the building
belonging to the financial institution,
are related. So when the two senses of the
homonymous word are related we call the
word polysemous. So a polysemous word has
a related, multiple related meanings and
most non-rare words have multiple meanings
and so polysemy is quite common.
When the meanings between related words
are systematic, we call this systematic
polysemy or sometimes metonymy. So lots of
polysemy is systematic, so for example
words like school, university, hospital,
all of these have the same polysemy we saw
for bank. They can mean the institution 
or they can mean the building. So we say
there's a systematic relationship between
buildings and organizations.
There's other kinds of systematic polysemy. 
So we might refer to an author,
Jane Austen wrote Emma. Or her works, 
I love Jane Austen, meaning I love the books
that she writes. Or Jane Austen is stored 
on that shelf over there.
Trees. We might talk about the blossoms of
plums, or the fruit, the plum I ate yesterday, and
again, a systematic polysemy between authors 
and works of the author, or trees and their fruit.
So lots of kinds of systematic polysemy like this.
How do we know when a word 
has more than one sense?
One test we often use is the zeugma test. 
Consider these two senses of the word serve:
which flights serve breakfast, and does 
Lufthansa serve Philadelphia, where here
we mean give a meal to a passenger and 
here we mean an airline flies to a
particular city. And the zeugma test 
says let's form a sentence using both senses
of the word serve and see how bad it sounds. 
So, does Lufthansa serve breakfast and San Jose?
Well that sounds funny. And so since this
conjunction sounds weird, we say these are
two different senses of serve.
We say two words are synonyms if they have 
the same meaning, in some or all contexts.
So a nut can be called hazelnut by some 
people, and filbert by others and it means
the same thing. Or a couch and a sofa, or 
the words big and large or automobile and car.
So we say two lexemes are synonyms 
if they can be substituted for each other
in all situations and if that's the case we say
they have the same propositional meaning.
Now, as it happens, there are very few, or
perhaps no examples of perfect synonymy.
Even if many aspects of meaning of two 
words are, are identical, they still may not
preserve their acceptability depending
on politeness or slang or register or genres.
So while water and H2O technically mean 
the same thing, in practice we're not gonna
use H2O to describe our beautiful day in the 
mountains looking at a running stream.
And even big and large, which seem like they 
might be synonyms, have different meanings
in different situations. Let's look at that.
So, we might say, how big is that plane?
Or, would I be flying on a large or a
small plane? And it sounds like the senses
of big and large are the same there. They
seems like synonyms. They both refer to
some-, to a measure of size, and were
large on some, some scale of size.
But consider these sentences. Miss Nelson
became a kind of big sister to Benjamin.
Miss Nelson became a kind of large sister
to Benjamin. Now here, big and large mean
very different things. Big sister means
older sister here, and large sister simply
can't have that meaning. It means a
physically larger sister, which is a funny
kind of meaning. And so we want to say
that big here, big has a sense that large
simply lacks. Big has a sense, there's a
sense of big that mean older or grown up
and large just lacks this sense. So
sometimes, even if two words seem to have
very similar meaning, some of the senses
may be different between the two words.
And that tells us that synonymy is really 
a relation between senses rather than,
than a relationship between words.
So we say that one of the senses of big,
the one meaning physically large and one
of the senses of large, meaning physically
large, it's hard to define, isn't it? Both of
those senses, those senses are in a
synonymy relationship, but not the entire
words. Another important relationship
between word senses is antonymy. So, antonyms
are senses that are opposites with respect
to one feature of meaning, and otherwise
very similar. So we have, dark and light,
short and long, fast and slow. All
these are words which are, have very
similar meanings. Short and long both mean
I'm a property of length, and short just
means that I'm at this end of the scale,
and long means I'm at the other end of the
scale. So more formally we say antonyms
define a binary opposition or they can be
at opposite ends of the scale. So two
kinds of antonymy. So in long and short,
and fast and slow, we have this binary
opposition. Or they can be reversives, so
in a verb like to rise or to fall, or, or
the words up and down.
They're not at different ends of the scale, 
they're different directions.
So we say they're reversive directions. 
So two kinds of antonymy.
Again, relationships between senses, 
specific kinds of relationships between senses.
And perhaps the most important relationship 
between senses that we'll see,
is that of hyponymy and hypernymy. 
So we say that one sense is a hyponym
of another if the first sense is more specific 
or denotes a subclass of the other.
So we say that car is a hyponym of vehicle, 
mango is a hyponym of fruit,
so another word for hyponym might be 
subclass or subordinate.
And conversely, hypernym, or superordinate. 
I try to remember this by saying that hyper is super.
Here we have, vehicle is a hypernym of car,
meaning it's a supertype of car;
car is a subtype of vehicle, vehicle is a s-,
superordinate of car.
Fruit is a hypernym of mango. 
And so I've given you some examples here,
with the superordinate, like vehicle, 
and the subordinate, like car.
So hypernyms, or hyponyms, hypernyms,
hyponyms, or superordinate, subordinate
will be synonyms here. Now, more
formally, we say that the class denoted
by the superordinate or hypernym,
extensionally includes the class denoted
by the hyponym. We can define hyp-,
hyponymy also by entailment.
We say a sense A of a hyponym, excuse me, 
a sense A is a hyponym of sense B
if being an A entails being a B. 
And hyponymy is usually transitive,
so if A is a hyponym of B and B is a hyponym 
of C, that entails that A is a hyponym of C.
And another common name for this hyponymy 
hierarchy is the is-a hierarchy.
Intuitively we say A is-a B, or A is a B 
sometimes without the dash.
Or we also sometimes say that B 
subsumes A. And we'll see all of this terms
is-a, hyponymy, subsumption, hierarchy, 
as we proceed through the course.
We often make a distinction between 
hyponyms and instances, and Wordnet,
the thesaurus we'll talk about it in a bit,
has both classes and instances.
An instance is an individual, a proper noun 
that is a unique entity. And so we say
San Francisco, that instance, is an instance of
the class city. So instance is a
relationship between an individual and a
class. City is a class and so we can say
city is a hyponym of municipality
or location or other kinds of, of classes.
So, hyponomy, or subsumption is a
relationship between a class and another class.
Instance is a relationship between
an individual and a class.
These are some of the fundamental definitions we'll
need in talking about extracting word meaning.
