A thesaurus is one of the most important
repositories for word meaning.
In this lecture, we'll talk about WordNet, 
one of the most important thesauri.
Thesauri or ontologies are used for all 
sorts of applications: information extraction
or retrieval, question answering, lots of
bioinformatic applications, machine
translations. They play a role in all
sorts of places. One of the most commonly
used ones, WordNet, is a hierarchically
organized lexical database. It's an online
thesaurus, but also it has some aspects of a
dictionary. And, Wordnet itself is in
English, but there's lots of other
languages that are either available or
under development. And in WordNet itself
we have about, over 100,000 nouns, and
over 10,000 verbs, and also adjectives and
adverbs, and for each of those, we're
gonna have definitions and ontological
relations.
So for example take the word bass or 
bass, in Wordnet.
We have nouns and we also have verbs. 
So, here's a list of nouns, each of them,
each of the senses, and adjectives. 
So, we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 senses
of bass or bass, in Wordnet. So, sea bass or 
fresh water bass. Or bass voice or basso, and so on.
And in WordNet a sense is defined by 
what's called a synset or synonym set.
That's the set of near synonyms, similar words,
that instantiates a sense, or a concept.
And also we have a gloss. So for example,
take chump. As a noun we have the gloss, a
person who is gullible and easy to take
advantage of. And this sense of chump is
shared by nine words. So, we have chump
one, and fool two, so the second sense of
fool, and the ninth sense of the word
mark, and the first sense of the word
fall-guy and so on. So, each of these
senses has the same gloss. Now it's not
every sense of those words. So, for
example gull has another sense, sense two,
which is a kind of aquatic bird. So, a
synset is set of near synonyms,
meaning particular senses of words that
all have a similar meaning.
And here's the WordNet hypernym hierarchy for
bass or bass. This is one sense of bass,
an adult male singer with the lowest
voice. And a, you see that a bass is a
kind of singer, which is a kind of
musician, which is a kind of performer,
a kind of person, a kind of organism, all
the way up to physical entity and entity.
So with the hyp-, hypernym hierarchy goes
all the way to the top.
Now, WordNet has a lot of relations. 
We've talked about relations before.
So we have, hypernyms and hyponyms. But 
WordNet also has relationships like member.
So the, the relation has-member. 
So, for example, a group like faculty
has members like professors. It has 
instances, we talked about instances.
So the relationship between composers 
in general, and the one composer, Bach.
Or the one composer Johann Sebastian 
Bach, of course there's more than one Bach.
And then we have meronyms and holonyms. 
So part whole relationships between
individuals, so a table has a part, which is 
a leg and a course has a part which is a meal
and so on. So those are the relationships 
between parts and whole.
So lots of these relationships occur in 
WordNet, and antonymy as well.
Now, you can look on the web for WordNet, 
and here it is.
So we can look for the word bass or bass.
And sure enough, there it is.  There's our 
senses of bass and we can click on one of them.
Let's click on one of the fish.
There we go and now we can ask for 
the whole set of inherited hypernyms
and there's a bass is a kind of,
or bass excuse me is a kind of freshwater
fish, a kind of seafood, a kind of food,
all the way up, again all the way down
here to entity at the bottom. So here's
the whole hypernym or superordinate hierarchy.
Now there are standard libraries for accessing 
word WordNet. There are Python libraries
and there are Java libraries and we've 
given you some pointers here.
Another important thesaurus or ontology
is MeSH, the medical subject headings
thesaurus from the National Library of
Medicine. So this has almost a couple
hundred thousand entries corresponding to
a lot of headings. So here's one,
hemoglobin and it has a set of what are
called entry terms: hemoglobin, ferrous
hemoglobin, and I don't even know how to
pronounce that word. And these are the
syns that corresponds to the synsets in
WordNet. This is the set of synonyms, for
defining hemoglobins. 
And then we have a gloss as well.
So here's the MeSH hierarchy, here are the 
top, sixteen top level categories.
So we might wanna look inside one of them. 
Let's say chemicals and drugs,
and inside those we might wanna look 
inside amino acids. And if we do that
we can look inside proteins, and there's 
hemoglobins. So there's the hierarchy for MeSH.
And, this ontology is used to provide 
synonyms or what are called entry terms
in the MeSH terminology; provide hypernyms 
from the hierarchy just like WordNet.
And MeSH is used for indexing journal articles 
in the National Library of Medicine's
bibliographic database, MEDLINE/PubMed, 
where there's twenty million journal articles,
where the articles are hand-assigned ten or 
twenty MeSH terms. So a useful ontology.
So we've seen WordNet and MeSH, two very
commonly used thesauri or ontologies.
An important place to get representations of
word meaning and word relations like
hyponomy and synonomy.
