Today we're gonna introduce the topic of
language modeling, one of the most
important topics in natural language
processing. The goal of language modeling
is to assign a probability to a sentence.
Why would we want to assign a probability
to a sentence? This comes up in all sorts
of applications. In machine translation,
for example, we'd like to be able to
distinguish between good and bad
translations by their probabilities. So,
"high winds tonight" might be a better
translation than "large winds tonight"
because high and winds go together well.
In spelling correction, we see a phrase
like "fifteen minuets from my house". That's
more likely to be a mistake from "minutes".
And one piece of information that lets us
decide that is that "fifteen minutes from"
is a much more likely phrase than "fifteen
minuets from". And in speech recognition, a
phrase like "I saw a van" is much more
likely than a phrase that sounds
phonetically similar, "eyes awe of an". But
it's much less likely to have that
sequence of words. And it turns out
language modelings play a role in
summarization, and question answering,
really everywhere. So the goal of a
language model is to compute the
probability of a sentence or a sequence of
words. So given some sequence of words w1
through wn, we're gonna compute their
probability P of w, and we'll use capital W
to mean a sequence from w1 to wn. Now, this is
related to the task of computing the
probability of an upcoming word, so P of w5
given w1 through w4 is very related to the
task of computing P(w1, w2, w3, w4, w5). A
model that computes either of these
things, either P(W), capital W, meaning a
string, the joint probability of the whole
string, or the conditional probability of
the last word given the previous words,
either of those, we call that a language
model. Now it might have better to call
this the grammar. I mean technically what
this is, is telling us something about how
good these words fit together. And we
normally use the word grammar for that,
but it turns out that the word "language
model", and often we'll see the acronym LM,
is standard, so we're gonna go with that.
So, how are we going to compute this joint
probability? We want to compute, let's say the
probability of the phrase "its water is so
transparent that", this little part of a
sentence. And the intuition for how
language modeling works is that you're
going to rely on the chain rule of
probability. And just to remind you about
the chain rule of probability. Let's think
about the definition of conditional
probability. So P of A given B
Equals P of A comma B over P of B.
And we can rewrite that, so P of A
given B times P of B 
equals P of A comma B, or turning it
around, P of A comma B equals P of A
given B (I'll make sure it's a "given") times P
of B. And then we could generalize this to
more variables so the joint probability of
a whole sequence A B C D is the
probability of A, times B given A, times C
conditioned on A and B, times D
conditioned on A B C. So this is the chain
rule. In a more general form of the chain
rule we have here the probability of any,
joint probability of any sequence of
variables is the first, times the
condition of the second and the first,
times the third conditioned of the
first two, up until the last conditioned
on the first n minus one. Alright, the
chain rule. So now, the chain rule can be
applied to compute the joint probability
of words in a sentence. So let's suppose
we have our phrase, "its water is so
transparent". By the chain rule, the
probability of that sequence is the
probability of "its" times the probability
of "water" given "its", times the probability
of "is" given "its water", times the
probability of "so" given "its water is", and
finally times the probability of
"transparent" given "its water is so". Or, more
formally, the probability, joint
probability of a sequence of words is the
product over all i of the probability of
each word times the prefix up until that
word. How are we gonna estimate these
probabilities? Could we just count and
divide? We often compute probabilities by
counting and dividing. So, the probability
of "the" given "its water is so transparent
that", we could just count how many times
"its water is so transparent that the"
occurs and divide by the number of times
"its water is so transparent" occurs. So we
could divide this by this. And get a
probability. We can't do that. And the
reason we can't do that is there's just
far too many possible sentences for us to
ever estimate these. There's no way we could
get enough data to see all the counts of
all possible sentences of English. So what
we do instead is, we apply a simplifying
assumption called the Markov assumption,
named for Andrei Markov. And the Markov
Assumption suggest that we estimate the
probability of "the" given "its water is so
transparent that" just by computing instead
the probability of "the" given the word "that",
or-- The very last "that", "that" meaning the
last word in the sequence. Or maybe we
compute the probability of "the" given "its
water is so transparent that" given just
the last two words, so "the" given
"transparent that". That's the Markov
Assumption. Let's just look at the
previous or maybe the couple previous
words rather than in the entire context. More
formally, the Markov Assumption says: The
probability of a sequence of words is the
product for each word of the
conditional probability of that word,
given some prefix of the last few words.
So, in other words, in the chain rule
product of all the probabilities we're
multiplying together, we estimate the
probability of wᵢ, given the entire prefix
from one to i-1 by a simpler to
compute probability: wᵢ given just the
last few words. The simplest case of a
Markov model is called the unigram model.
In the unigram model, we simply estimate
the probability of a whole sequence of
words by the product of probabilities of
individual words, "unigrams". And if we
generated sentences by randomly picking
words, you can see that it would look like
a word salad. So here's some automatically
generated sentences generated by Dan Klein,
and you can see that the word "fifth", the
word "an", the word "of" -- this doesn't look
like a sentence at all. It's just a random
sequence of words: "thrift, did, eighty,
said". That's the properties of the unigram
model. Words are independent in this
model. Slightly more intelligent is a
bi-gram model where we condition on the
single previous word. So again, we
estimate the probability of a word given
the entire prefix from the beginning to
the previous word, just by the previous
word. So now if we use that and generate
random sentences from a bigram model, the
sentences look a little bit more like
English. Still, something's wrong with
them clearly. "outside, new, car", well, "new
car" looks pretty good. "car parking" is
pretty good. "parking lot". But together,
"outside new car parking lot of the
agreement reached": that's not English. So
even the bigram model, by giving up this
conditioning that English has, we're
simplifying the ability to model, to model
what's going on in a language. Now we
can extend the n-gram model further to
trigrams, that's 3-grams. Or 4-grams
or 5-grams. But in general, it's
clear that n-gram modeling is an
insufficient model of language. And the
reason is that language has long-distance
dependencies. So if I want to, say, predict
"The computer which I had just put into the
machine room on the fifth floor", and I
hadn't seen this next word, and I want to
say, what's my likelihood of the next
word? And I conditioned it just on the
previous word, "floor", I'd be very unlucky
to guess "crashed". But really, the "crashed" is
the main verb of the sentence, and "computer"
is the subject, the head of the subject
noun phrase. So, if we know "computer" was
the subject, we're much more likely to
guess crashed. So, these kind of 
long-distance dependencies mean that in the
limit of really good model of predicting
English words, we'll have to take into
account lots of long-distance information.
But it turns out that in practice, we can
often get away with these n-gram models,
because the local information, especially
as we get up to trigrams and 4-grams,
will turn out to be just constraining
enough that it in most cases it'll solve
our problems for us.
