In this lecture, we'll introduce the topic
of text classification and the Naive Bayes
algorithm which is one of the most
important ways of doing text
classification. Let's begin by looking at
some examples of text classification
applications. Here I've shown an email
that I actually received the other day.
How do I know that this email is spam?
Take a look at the mail and think of some
features you might automatically extract
from this email that tells you that it's
spam. You might notice the word greats. A
mis, a misspelling of great, so we have a
typo here. Maybe you might notice
important notice and maybe an exclamation
point. It's pretty rare that universities
put exclamation points in their subject
headers. You might notice that there's no,
Dan here, it's not addressed to me in
particular, and we have undisclosed
recipients and there's no particular
address. And the URL's a little funny
here, that's not a Stanford URL. Maybe the
word exciting. Each of these features can
be combined in a classified give us some
evidence that we got a piece of spam.
Another important text classification
class is authorship attribution. How do I
know which author wrote which piece of
text. One of the most famous examples of
authorship attribution is the famous
anonymous essays called the Federalist
Papers that were written at the beginning
of the history of our country in part to
convince the state of New York to ratify
the early constitution. And three authors
wrote various numbers of the letters but
twelve of the letters it wasn't clear
which author wrote. And in 1960 the And in
1963 Mosteller and Wallace show that
Bayesian methods were able to distinguish
which letters were written by Madison and
which letters were written by Hamilton.
And the Bayesian methods that they used in
1963, gave rise to the naive base method
that we're going to be talking about
today. Another text classification task is
gender identification. Determining if an
author is male or female. Recent research
in gender identification has shown that we
can look at the number of pronouns and
other features. The number of determiners,
the number of noun phrases, are, subtlety
indicative of the difference between male
and female writers. Female writers tend to
use more pronouns and male writers tend to
use more facts and determiners in their
noun phrases. And you can see from that,
that, here we have a lot of pronouns. And
here we have a lot of determiners and, and
factual sentences with, with the copula
verbs and so you might determine that this
in fact a male and this is a female and
that would be correct. This is the author
Margaret Drabble and this is the author
Anthony Grey. Another text classification
task is sentiment analysis. And one of the
classic sentiment analysis tasks is movie
review identification. Given a review,
whether it's a movie or a product, can I
tell whether this review is positive or
negative. And although I'm gonna show you
an example here for movies, this can apply
to any product review for any, any product
or service you might find on the web. So
this is actually a very important
commercial application. So, suppose we saw
a review that said unbelievably
disappointing. Well, that's clearly a
negative review. How'bout, full of zany
characters and richly applied satire,
positive. How'bout, this is the greatest
screwball comedy ever filmed. We've got
words like greatest, or greatest ever,
that's very positive. How'bout, it was
pathetic. The worst part about it was the
boxing scenes. Here, we've got evidence
like pathetic and worst, and so on, to
tell us that this is, in fact, a negative
review. Text classification often. We also
apply text classification to scientific
articles. For example, deciding what the
topic of a particular article in a data
base like [inaudible] line might be. For
example, we might have to decide, you
know, automatically indexing an article
which of various subjects, antagonist or
blood supply or drug therapy or
epidemiology, apply to any particular
article that's written that's in our data
base. So, in summary text classification
is the task of assigning any kind of topic
category to any piece of text. And that
could be subject categories in, in, in
some kind of online data base. It could be
detecting spam. It could be choosing an
author from a set of authors, choosing
their gender or maybe it's their age. You
want to find the young writers or old
writers. Telling if a language [inaudible]
if a text was written in one language
versus another language. And the important
application of sentimentals. All of these
are examples of text classification. Let's
define the task of text classification. We
have as input a document d, and then a
fixed set of classes a set c with j
classes c1, c2 up 'til cj. And our goal
given this document in the set of classes
is to predict a class c from that set of
classes. Our job is to take a document and
assign a class to that document. How do we
do this? The simplest possible text
classification method is to use hand
return rules. So for example if we're
doing spam detection, we might just have a
list of, of bad email addresses or
blacklists that these people are probably
spammers. Or we might look for phrases
like millions of dollars, or you have been
selected. These are good indications that
we have spam. And if these rules are
carefully refined by an expert, you can
get high accuracy from hand written rules.
But in general, building and maintaining
these rules is expensive. So, although
hand coded rules are often used as part of
a system of text classification we, we
generally combine that with an important
method for machine learning. This method
in supervised machine learning. So in
supervised machine learning. We have a
document D, just as we did before and a
fixed set of classes, as we did before,
but we need one more thing now. We need a
training set of some la. Some documents
that have been hand labeled for their
class. So we have for document one, we
know that it's in class one. For document
two it's in some other class. Maybe for
document M we have a label for the class
of document M. So given. The document, the
set of classes and the fixed and the
training set of hand labeled documents.
The goal of machine learning is to produce
a classifier and we'll be using gamma to
refer to the classifier and gamma's a
function that, given a new document will
give us the class. So, given a set of
training labels of documents and classes,
we'll learn a classifier that maps a
document to a class. There's lots of kinds
of machine learning classifiers. We're
going to talk today about naive Bayes, but
we'll see, we'll look later, in the
course, we'll talk about logistic
regression and we'll touch on other kinds
of classifiers, like support vector
machines or so called SVMs, [inaudible]
neighbors, lots of other classifiers. No
matter which classifier we use, the task
of text classification is to take a
document, it's text, other kinds of
features and extract features that
represent the document and build the
classifier that can tell us which class
the document belongs to.
