What is sentiment analysis? We discussed
in a previous lecture that deciding if a
movie review was positive or negative is
an important text classification task. And
sentiment is a kind of text
classification. So deciding that
unbelievably disappointing suggests that a
movie was bad. Or richly applied satire is
probably good. Screwball comedy, good,
pathetic, bad. This kind of sentiment can
also be applied to products. For example,
Google product search might wanna for a
given product like say, this particular
printer might want to automatically
extract facts about the printer and
sentiment for these facts. So, these are
called aspects or attributes. We like to
automatically decide that act; aspects or
attributes of the printer like its ease of
use, or costumer service are important
aspects of the printer and then
automatically determine the sentiments. We
might wanna say, from sentences like, this
was very easy to set up. That most of the
sentiment for this product, for this
aspect, ease of use is positive. Perhaps
other kinds, other aspects of this product
like customer service, maybe we saw more
negative sentiment in reviews and less
positive. So, the task of reading all the
reviews and from each review n noticing
phrases that suggest a sentiment and then
aggregating this sentiment over all
reviews. And the task of s, attribute. For
aspect detection and sentiment analysis.
And we can see this for many other
products, not just Google, So Bing has the
same thing for the same printer again. We
can extract aspects like performance and
ease of use and print speed. And summarize
from the various. And. Reviews the
positive and negative sentiment. Sentiment
can also be applied to things that aren't
products for example measuring consumer
confidence. So this lovely graph from
[inaudible] looks at sentiment from
Twitter tweets to try to predict consumer
confidence over time. And what they've
shown you in this blue line here is a
sentiment as expressed in Twitter positive
and negative sentiment and in the black
line you've got gallot poll data. And they
show a pretty good correlation here
between Twitter sentiment and the gallot
poll, suggesting we can use Twitter to
measure public opinion. In fact, this kind
of Twitter sentiment has been shown to
directly predict the stock market.
[inaudible] it all and from Twitter
extracted things like calmness or
happiness, various kinds of sentimental
attributes they could extract from Twitter
and then show that those attributes in
particular. They showed that calmness
predicts the Dow Jones Industrial Average,
three days later. So here's the Dow Jones
Average and here's their measure, the
scored measure of calmness, they get from
Twitter and they show that by shifting
calm a little earlier that, that they have
high predictions in these regions, of the
Dow Jones. Tweeter sentiment has also been
used simply to protect, predict people
sentiment toward brands in general. So
for, here's the tweeter sentiment ap. The
project by Alec Goe and his colleagues at
Stanford who showed you can take query
like Untied Airlines look at all the
tweets mentioning United Airlines and
Determine if they're positive, here's
positive down here, negative there's a
couple negative ones, or neutral and then,
and then summarize all of these sentiments
so people, at least when I ran this query
had some pretty negative things to say
about United, more than they had positive
things to say. So we can use Twitter to
see, in general, how people feel about all
sorts of things. The task of sentiment
analysis is often called by other names.
We call it opinion extraction or opinion
mining. Sentiment mining, subjectivity
analysis. Lots of different names. And
we're going to use this for all sorts of
tasks. So we've seen a lot of these R
movies, positive or negative? What do
people think about products like some new
iPhone? In general, can we measure public
sentiment? How is consumer confidence? Are
people in despair? What do people think
about particular candidates or particular
issues in politics? And in general, once
we can measure people?s sentiment, can we
use that to predict things? Market trends,
election outcomes, anything we might want
to predict. The psychologist Klaus Scherer
has shown that there are lots of different
kinds of effective state. When I talk
about sentiments, it's really just one of
many kinds of effective states. So he
talks about emotion, that's a brief kind
of sentiment being angry or being sad,
mood like being cheerful or being
depressed. And interpersonal stance, how
do I feel toward you. I feel friendly, I
feel warm, I feel distant. Sentiment is a
subtype of attitudes. Attitudes are my
beliefs or dispositions toward somebody so
do I like something, do I love it, do I
desire it, do I value it. Then we can talk
about very stable things like personality
traits. Am I an anxious person? Am I a
hostile person? And so on. So Sentiment is
an attitude, a kind of enduring
effectively colored belief or disposition
toward an object or person. And that
definition suggests the task of sentiment
analysis, we're detecting attitudes, again
I've given you the [inaudible] definition
there. And we can talk about detecting who
has this attitude? The holder or source of
the attitude? The target of the attitude
or aspect. What is it that we have this
attitude about? The type of attitude. So
you can imagine from [inaudible] list,
measuring liking and loving and hating and
valuing and desiring. Or much more
commonly, a simple weighted polarity. Do
we, are we positively inclined toward this
target, negatively inclined or neutral?
And we might have some strength value. How
positive and how negative? And we're gonna
do this from some text which has the
attitude and we might sometimes consider
an entire document and ask, what's this
whole document sentiment or we might,
sometimes, just look at individual
sentences and say, what's the sentiment of
this sentence. So the simplest task is the
attitude of some particular text, positive
or negative. Slightly more complex tasks
rate the attitude of this text from one to
five. So give, not just a binary value,
but some kind of ordinal or numeric value.
And more advanced sentiment tasks detect
the target, detect thesaurus, and maybe
detect more complex attitude types. So
this simplest task is the attitude of this
text, positive or negative, is the task
that we are gonna spend the most time on
