This is the second video of three, in which we prove that the average running time
of randomized quicksort is O(N log N).
So to remind you of the formal statements,
so getting into thinking about quicksort
where we implemented the choose pivot subroutine
to always choose a pivot uniformly at random
from the subarray that it gets passed.
And we're proving that for a worst case input array
for an arbitrary input array of length N
the average running time of quicksort with
the average over the range of possible pivot choices
is O(N log N).
So let me remind you of the story so far, this is where we left things at the previous video
we defined a few random variables, the sample space, recall,
is just the - all the different things that can happen
that is, all of the random coinflip outcomes that
quicksort can produce, which is equivalent to all the pivot choices made by quicksort
Now the random variables we care about - so first of all there's capital C
which is the number of comparisons between pairs of elements
in the input array that quicksort makes for a given pivot sigma
and then there are the xijs
and so that is just meant to count the number of comparisons involving
the i-th smallest and the j-th smallest elements in the input array.
You'll recall that zi and zj denote the i-th smallest and the j-th smallest entries in the array.
Now because every comparison involves some zi and some zj,
we can express capital C as a sum over the xijs.
So we did that in the last video, we applied linearity of expectation
we used the fact that xij are 0 or 1, that is indicator random variables
to write the expectation of xij just as a probability that is equal to one
and that gave us the following expression.
So the key insight and really the heart of the quicksort analysis
is to derive an exact expression for this
probability as a function of i and j.
So for example the third smallest element in the array, the seventh smallest element in the array
wherever they may be scattered in the input array and you want to know exactly what is the probability
they get compared at some point of the execution of quicksort.
And we're going to get an extremely precise understanding of this probability in the form
of this key claim.
So for all pairs of elements, and again, ordered pairs, we're thinking of i being less than j,
the probability that zi and zj get compared at some point of the execution in the quicksort is exactly
two divided by j minus i plus one.
So for example, in this example of third smallest element and the seventh smallest element
it would be exactly 40% of the time.
Two over five is how often those two elements would get compared
if you ran quicksort with a random choice of pivots.
That going to be true for every j and i.
The proof of this key claim is the purpose of this video.
So how do we prove this key claim?
How do we prove that the probability that zi and zj get compared
is exactly two over the quantity of j minus i plus 1?
Well fix your favorite ordered pair.
So fix elements zi, zj
with i  less than j, for example the third smallest and the seventh smallest elements in the array
now, what we want to reason about is
the set of all elements in the input array
between zi and zj, inclusive.
I dont  mean between in term of positions in the array
I mean between in terms of their values.
So consider the set
between zi and zj plus one inclusive.
So zi, zi + 1 dot dot dot zj - 1 and zj
so for example the third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh smallest elements in the input array.
Wherever they may be, they are of course -
the initial array is not sorted, so there's no reason to believe that these j minus i plus one elements are contigous, okay?
They're scattered throughout the input array. We're going to think about them, okay? zi through zj inclusive.
Now, throughout the execution of quicksort, these j minus i plus one elements
lead parallel lives, at least for a while
in the following sense:
Begin with the outermost call to quicksort
and suppose that none of these j minus i plus one elements
is chosen as a pivot.
Where then could the pivot lie?
Well it could only be a pivot that is greater than all of these
or it could be less than all of these
For example this is third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh smallest elements in the array.
Well the pivot is then either the minimum or the second minimum
in which case it is smaller than all the five elements
or it is eigth or largest - or larger element - in the array, in which case, bigger than all of them. So there's no way
you're going to have a pivot that somehow is wedged in between this set
because this is a contiguous set of order statistics, okay?
Now what do I mean by these elements leading parallel lives?
Well in the case where the pivot is chose to be smaller than all of these elements
then all of these elements will wind up to right of the pivot
and they will all be passed to the  recursive call, the second recursive call.
If the pivot is chosen to be bigger,
than all of these elements, then they'll all show up on the left side of the partitioned array
and they'll all be passed to the first recursive call.
Iterating this or proceeding inductively, we see that
as long as the pivot is not drawn from the set of j minus i plus one elements,
this entire set will get passed on to same recursive call.
So this j minus i plus one elements are living blissfully together in harmony,
until the point in which one of them is chosen
as a pivot
and of course that has to happen at some point
the recursion only stops at some point when the array length is either equal to zero  or one
so if for no other reason, at some point, there will be no other elements in the recursive call, other than these j minus i plus one
Okay? So at some point the reverry is interrupted and one of them is chosen as a pivot.
So, let's pause the quicksort algorithm and think about
what things look like, at the time that one of those j minus i plus one elements
is first chosen as a pivot element.
There are two  cases worth distinguishing between
In the first case the pivot happens to be either zi or zj.
Now remember what is that we are trying to analyse.
We're trying to analyse the frequency, the probability that zi and zj gets compared
Well, if zi and zj are in the same recursive call,
and one of them gets chosen as the pivot
Then they're definitely are going to get compared
Remember, when you partition an array around its pivot element,
the pivot gets compared to everything else.
So, if zi is chosen as a pivot, it certainly gets compared to zj.
if zj gets chosen as a pivot, it gets compared to zi.
So either way, if either one of these is chosen,
they're definitely compared.
If on the other hand, the first of these j minus i plus one elements to be chosen as a pivot,
is not zi or zj. If instead it comes from the set zi + 1 up to zj - 1 and so on
then the opposite is true,
then  zi and zj are not compared now, nor will they ever be compared in the future.
So why is that? That requires two observations
first recall that when we choose an pivot and we partition an array
all of the comparisons involved will pivot.
So two elements of which neither of them is a pivot, do not get compared, in the partition subroutine.
So they don't get compared now.
Moreover, since zi is the smallest of these and zj is the biggest of these
and the pivot comes from somewhere between them
this choice of pivot is going to split zi and zj in diferent recursive calls
zi gets passed to the first recursive call
zj gets passed to the second recursive call
and they will never meet again.
So there's no comparisons in the future either.
So these two  right here, I would say is the key insight, in the quicksort analysis.
The fact that for a given pair of elements we can very simply characterize
exactly when they get compared, and when they do not get compared in the quicksort algorithm.
That is, they get compared exactly when one of them
is chosen as the pivot before any of the other elements with value in between those two
has had the oportunity to be a pivot.
That 's exactly when they get compared.
So this has allowed us to prove this key claim. This exact expression on the comparison probability,
that we'll plug into the formula that we had earlier
and will give us the deisred valued on the average number of comparisons.
So let's fill in those details.
So first let me just first rewrite the high order bit from the previous slide.
So now at last, we will use the fact, that our quicksort implementation
always chooses a pivot uniformly at ramdom.
That each element of a subarray is equally likely to serve as the pivot element
in the corresponding partitioning call
So what does this buys us? This just says all of the elements are symetric.
So each of the elements  zi, zi + 1 all the way up to zj is equally likely to be the first one asked to serve as a pivot element.
Now the probablity that zi and zj get compared is simply the probability that we're in case one as opposed to in case two
and since each element is equally likely to be the pivot
that just means there're just two bad cases, two cases in which one can occur
out of the j minus i plus one possible different choices of pivot.
Now we're talking about a set of set of j minus i plus one elements, each of which of whom is equally likely to be asked
to be served first as pivot element
and the bad case, the case that leads to a comparison,
there's two different possiblities for that.
If zi or zj is first and the other j minus i minus one outcomes lead to the good case, where zi and zj never get compared.
So overall because everyone is equally likely to be the first pivot
we have that the probability that zi and zj get compared
is exactly the number of pivot choices that we do comparison divided by the number of pivot choices overall.
And that is exactly the key claim.
That is exactly what we  was the probability that a given zi and zj get compared no matter i and j are.
So wrapping up this video, where does that leave us? We can now plug in this expression
for this comparison probability
into the double sum we had before.
So putting it all together what we have is that - what we really care about - the average number of comparisons
that quicksort makes on this particular input of array of length N
is just this double sum which iterates over all the possible
ordered pairs  i, j
and what we had here before was the probability of comparing zi and zj. We now know exactly what that is.
So we just substitute
and this is where we're gonna stop for this video.
So this is gonna be our key expression star
which we still neeed to evaluate, but that is going to be the third video.
So essentially we done all of the conceptual difficulty
in understanding where comparisons come from in the quicksort algorithm.
All that remains is a little bit of an algebraic manipulation
to show that this star expression really is O(N log N) and that's coming up next.
