Let us conclude by bringing
into perspective and focus,
what we have seen so far.
At its heart, independence is a very
simple elementary and intuitive concept.
Independence captures the idea
that independent possibilities,
commonly interpreted, will multiply.
Independence is a product rule at heart.
Where matters get complex,
is when we have a large number of
putatively independent events.
In such settings,
to check independence requires a formal
check of a very large number
of product possibilities.
This looks forbidding.
But again, common experience and
intuition shows us the way.
The simplest setting where independence
arises in large complex experiments is
when one has, as in a compound experiment,
comprised of repeated independent trials.
So, in particular, in a notation we've
seen, suppose Gothic A1 represents
a first trial whose outcomes are a finite,
or a countable number of possibilities.
Gothic A2 represents a second trial
whose outcomes are possibly different,
and again a finite or a countable
number of possibilities, and so forth.
When we think of the compound experiment
comprised of all these trials put
together, one after another, then the
sample points are, let's say in two pools
of possibilities, and we call this
compound experiment the product space.
The elements are obtained by Cartesian
products of the individual trials.
The natural probability measure in
such a setting is the product measure,
where we take the individual atomic
measures for each of the trials and
simply multiplies them out.
As we've seen, this immediately,
without the necessity for
further checks,
gives us independence on a large scale.
As a slogan,
events determined by non-overlapping
groups of independent trials
are also independent.
And, no further checks are necessary.
This concludes Part Two of Tableau 9.
When we return, we shall move on to
looking at how independence arises in
subtle and deep ways in a variety
of problems of practical import.
So, in the next tableau,
we'll talk about games of chance, and
in particular gambling.
We'll talk about genetics.
And, we'll talk about sociology, and
a return to basketball, and a hot hand.

