Okay. 
To summarize this segment of the class on 
log linear taggers. 
These were the key ideas. 
The first key idea was, to directly model 
the conditional probability of any tag 
sequence conditioned on a word sequence. 
Using a decomposition, where we have a 
product of terms. 
We have a product of positions, I equals 
1 to n. 
And at each point we condition the value 
for the ith tag on the previous two tags 
and on the entire sentence being tagged. 
This left, left us with a modeling 
problem. 
The question of how do we actually model 
these conditional probabilities, we're 
conditioning on a lot of potential 
context here. 
There are many potential features that 
might be useful, and so the second key 
idea in log-linear model was to estimate 
these terms using log-linear models. 
That may quite rich use of features 
looking at the context previews through 
text and potentially really arbitrary 
context to these surrounding words. 
The final insight in log-linear models, 
is that for a given test sentence w1 
through wn, we can use the Viterbi 
algorithm, to find the highest scoring or 
the highest probability tag sequence. 
And we can use the Viterbi algorithm, 
because we do have this Markov style 
assumption of these models. 
That the ith tag, depends only on the 
previous two tags in the context. 
Finally, the key advantage of Hidden 
Markov models, is really the flexibility 
in the feature definitions that 
log-linear taggers can use. 
We're now empowered to make up all kinds 
of features, which if you look at the 
current tag and the previous history 
where the history consists of all of this 
information. 
So, for example it was very easy to 
incorporate prefix and suffix features 
about words, or information about the 
previous word, or the next word, when 
we're, we're tagging the current word. 
All kinds of other features of the input 
sentence, and the surrounding context. 
And this really is a, key reason for 
preferring log-linear taggers over Markov 
models. 
The downside, of course, is that they're 
slightly more complicated, in terms of 
estimation. 
The parameter estimation method for 
log-linear taggers can be a little bit 
more complex and can be a little bit more 
computationally expensive. 
But in general it's worth the extra 
effort. 

