Okay.
So, to justify this recursive definition,
I am going to use an example.
So, we'll use this sentence we seen before
and let's see how we can calculate the
value for pi, 7, P, D.
So, recall this is going to be the highest
probability of any tag sequence ending in
tags P and D at positions 6 and 7.
So first, let's see how this expression
works out when we instantiate it for this
particular pi value.
So, I have a max of a w in, in our case,
7, so we're looking at S5.
This is simply the set of possible tags at
position 5 and that is equal to the set of
tags S, which is equal to D, N, V, P.
So, we have a max over those four possible
tags, and then I have pi of 6, W, P and
then I have q of D given W, P.
Then finally, I have e of xk, k7, in this
case, this is the seventh word in the
sentence, the given D.
So, this is the expression which we can
use to calculate pi, 7, P, D.
So, how could we justify this?
Their key insight is that, if we think of
any tag sequence ending in P and D at
position 6 and 7, it has to have included
some tag at position 5, and this max is
explicitly searching over these different
possible values for this tag at position
5.
For each possible value of the tag, we
multiply in the pi value and then a q
value of D given in the previous two tags
and then finally an admission value of the
given D.
The reason we do that is, if we fix a
particular tag, say N at position 5, then
the following property holds.
The highest probability path going through
tags N, P, D, at positions 5, 6, and 7 has
to have probability pi 6, N, P times q of
D given N, P times e of the given D.
So, that's the highest score for any tag
sequence ending in N, P, D at positions 5,
6, 7.
Why is that?
Well, the highest scoring tag sequence
ending in N, P, D at positions 5, 6, 7 has
to include the highest scoring tag
sequence ending in positions N and P are
positions 5 and 6, that's what this
probability is, and then we multiply in
the trigram parameter q and the emission
parameter e to take into account the
probability for this tag and this emission
probability.
So, that's the highest probability for any
tag sequence going through N, P, D.
And we simply do a search of all possible
tags at this previous position, and take
the max, and that gives us the highest
probability tag sequence ending in P and D
at positions 6 and 7.
