So in this final segment I want to talk
more about the ambiguity problem, and give
you some examples of how ambiguity comes
up in the kind of grammar that I've just
shown you.
Okay, so the first source of ambiguity
we're going to consider is part of speech
ambiguity.
And this is actually something we saw with
the lectures on part of speech tagging
earlier in this course.
It corresponds to the observation that
many words in English can take multiple
possible paths of speech.
So here's one example, the word duck can
be a singular noun but it can also be an
intransitive verb.
So it's ambiguous for its path of speech.
These types of part of speech ambiguity
frequently lead to multiple possible parse
structures for a particular sentence.
And I've shown you, 2 examples of a third
phrase structure for the string, saw her
duck with the telescope, down here.
So in this first structure, duck is a
singular noun.
And this structure basically corresponds
to the interpretation where somebody is
seeing the duck using the telescope to see
the duck.
Let's look at this second structure, in
this case, we have duck as an entransitive
verb, and actually we have, her duck, As a
sentence embedded within this verb phrase.
It's in fact, the sentence is an argument
to the verb soar, forming a VP here.
This interpretation basically corresponds
to the interpretation where I am seeing
somebody duck using the telescope to see
that person duck.
So, here I have a real duck in the world,
and here I have somebody ducking.
Can't see, see these two different
interpretations.
So that's our first source of ambiguity.
Part of speech ambiguity.
The second source is prepositional phrase
attachment.
I'll just recap, we had this example from
early on in this lecture, where I have the
sentence, "I drove down the road in the
car." And I noticed that we had two
possible structures for this sentence, one
where in the car is modifying drove, and
this corresponds to the natural
interpretation where I'm driving in the
car.
But as we said there is a second, somewhat
crazy, interpretation where the road is
actually located in the car, and in that
case, the prepositional phrase is actually
underneath this noun phrase.
So I want to give a second example of a
prepositional phrase attachment ambiguity.
Which I think illustrates an interesting
property.
So here we have a sentence.
John was believed to have been shot by
Bill.
And.
The most plausible interpretation has Bill
doing the shooting, so this preposition,
prepositional phrase by Bill modifies shot
essentially.
Okay, so somebody believes that Bill shot
John.
John.
There is actually a second interpretation
here, which is much less intuitive, at
least for humans, which is that "by Bill",
this prepositional phrase, modifies their,
their belief.
So let's just actually paraphrase these
two interpretations.
The first is that Bill shot John.
Somebody believes that Bill shot John.
And the second interpretation has Bill
believed[NOISE] that John.
Has been shot.
So this prepositional phrase, by Bill,
could modify shot, corresponding to the
reading that Bill has been doing the
shooting; or it could modify, believed,
where Bill is doing the, the believing.
What is interesting about this example, is
that it shows that there is a very strong
preference by humans for prepositional
phrases to modify the most recent verb.
So, both of these interpretations Bill
doing the shooting or believing, are quite
plausible as states of the world.
So using A Priori beliefs about what is
likely in the world, either of them looks
quite plausible.
And yet, humans have very strong
preference to the shooting.
Interpretation.
And the reason behind that is that there's
a strong preference for prepositions to
modify the most recent verb in a sentence.
So let's move on to another example of
ambiguity using the grammar I just showed
you.
And this concerns noun premodifiers.
So I think earlier in these slides, I
showed you this structure.
Or something very similar to this
structure.
So, here we have the sequence of words the
fast car mechanic.
And actually, here we have an N bar over
fast car, and this structure corresponds
to the interpretation, where we have a
mechanic who works on fast cars, okay?
So, it's a mechanic who whose specialty is
fast cars, for example.
Okay, because we have fast car as an
entire sub-phrase premodifying mechanic.
But under the grammar, I showed you, we
have a second structure which I've shown
you here and in this case we have a car
mechanic who is fast so this adjective
modifies this entire sub screen car
mechanic, okay so as a car mechanic who in
addition is fast so 2 ambiguity an
ambiguity here is an mechanic who works on
fast cars or it is a car mechanic who is
fast and we end up with 2 different
structures.
This kind of ambiguity within noun
premodifiers is absolutely prevalent and
you see it everywhere in sentences in
English and other languages.
