Hello and welcome to our first real 
lecture of Internet History, Technology 
and Security. 
We're going to start, of course, with 
Internet history. 
And I'm Charles Severance. 
Not all the material is copyright by me, 
some of it is copyrighted, I put IEEE 
Computer Society, particularly the 
articles that accompany some of the video 
interviews that I produced for IEEE 
Computer magazine. 
Richard Wiggins, my television show host, 
co-host also has graciously given 
permission to use some of his video. 
And the Open Michigan folks, Dave Malicke 
have helped to do copyright clearance on 
content that is sort of my slides. 
So that's great news. 
So, it's going to take us a couple of 
weeks to go through history and we're 
going to break it down into some phases. 
We're going to start at the dawn of 
electronic computing. 
I mean computing started, you know, early 
with abacuses and humans but, we're 
going to start with the moment that 
electronic computing, in particular 
because it was the moment when computing 
and communication were sort of co-born at 
the same time. And
communication before the Internet 
became normal. 
Then early Internet research and then the 
Internet itself that was academia and 
then of course for went out into the 
real world. And then the web, 
which really took all this connectivity 
and made it easy to use for everybody. 
It's really what our view now of this 
network is, very much through the web. 
And then from that point forward we look at 
sort of the commercialization of it and the 
ubiquity of it and the widespread use of it. 
So the first picture the first video that 
I want to show you is a little longer 
than most of the other videos. 
It is about Bletchley Park and there are 
many heroes at Bletchley Park. 
Of course this was a top-secret code 
breaking effort by the British government 
during World War II. 
World War II, I mean, if you think about it
in history, perhaps there is no time in 
history quite like World War II. 
If you go back to, well what kind of 
technologies we were using in 1910 and 
1920, to the technologies we were using 
in 1940, it's an amazing difference, you 
know, jet airplanes, radio, radar, so 
many things were invented and made 
usable and made production quality during 
that period of time. 
War, of course, is terrible but it does 
cause governments to fear for their lives 
and invest heavily, very heavily in 
research. And so we,
in some sense, even though war 
is a terrible thing, we sort of benefit 
from the extensive research. 
They were trying to solve wartime 
problems, but they ultimately solved 
problems that have changed our peacetime 
world in wonderful ways. 
So Bletchley Park is north of London, 
between Oxford and Cambridge, in England. 
And it's it was a code-breaking effort 
and at one point there were over 10,000 
people working on top-secret efforts to 
decode encrypted messages initially from 
Germans as they were using radio. 
So they called World War II a world war 
mostly because it touched geographically 
more than any other war had ever touched, 
since, before or since, really. 
You know, Alaska, United States, Italy, 
Africa, Russia, Japan, Philippines, you 
know, it, it just, it truly was 
geographically distributed and it was 
necessary to do unprecedented 
communications just to effectively
pursue the war. 
And this meant that communications had to 
be wireless. 
And the problem with wireless is
anyone can put up an antenna 
and listen to the wireless signal. 
There's no way to hide the wireless 
signal. 
Unlike a wire, that you could hide it, 
and if no one had access to the wire, you 
can't see what's in it. 
But if you are using wireless, in
fast-moving armies and long distances, 
then someone can intercept the wireless 
signal, and they can. 
So the trick of course was to create an 
encrypted wireless signal 
so they could see everything you sent, 
but it didn't make any sense to them. 
It all sounded like gibberish unless you, of 
course, know the code. 
And so this was the, a key technology 
was building codes and code-making 
machines. 
A good example of this was the Enigma 
made by Germany, which is we'll talk 
about these in the last part, the very 
last part of the class, in the security 
part of the class, 
how these codes and ciphers work. 
But they scramble material in a way 
that's generally unintelligible. 
And, of course, the really bright folks 
at Bletchley Park, Alan Turing, one of 
many really bright people at Bletchley Park 
used, you know, mathematics to, to say, 
you know, these codes may be more, more 
crackable than we think. 
There was folks from Poland who also 
informed the, them, to say, look, let's 
show what we did to crack it. 
Right before Poland was involved, 
they were working heavily on the 
mathematics of cracking. 
And so then they built these machines. 
And so, in this video that I'm about to 
show you, it's really, what I tried to do 
is, I tried to contrast the two machines. 
And one is an extremely fast mechanical 
computer, with relays and switches and 
things that spin and gears that move back 
and forth. That's a very physical 
computer that's that's looking for 
patterns. 
And as it's spinning it's checking for 
possible encoding combinations to try to 
just do a brute force checking of lots 
of different possibilities. 
And so it was a mechanical computer. 
The BOMBE was a mechanical computer. 
And then as the German encryption 
improved and they used different 
techniques with more sophisticated 
encryption, they just couldn't decrypt it 
with a mechanical computer any more. 
So they just were forced to build 
something faster, and that faster thing 
was the first truly powerful general 
purpose electronic computer in the world. 
Of course it was kept secret until the, 
certainly kept secret until the 60s and 
the 70s and much of it was still kept 
secret until even the 90s. 
And so its place in history is kind of a 
recent recent understanding. You can look 
at early history texts that talk 
about the first computer and they don't 
mention this one. 
Well that's because it was a secret until 
a long time. 
So the BOMBE was a powerful mechanical 
computer. 
The Colossus was a powerful electronic 
computer. 
But I have this picture, it was drawn by 
an artist for me. 
And in addition to showcasing, sort of, 
the moment where a mechanical computer, 
no matter how hard you tried, wouldn't work 
fast enough, and the 
electronic computer was 
sort of forcefully created out of
a tremendous need
What's also really interesting is the 
fact that Bletchley Park during this 
time, with 10,000 people, had
all kinds of people. 
You know, language experts, 
mathematicians, engineers, welders, and 
it's a really cross-disciplinary 
activity. 
And they were solving a problem of 
decrypting German transmissions but they 
ultimately solved the problem in the 
pursuit of that, of electronic 
communications and computation. 
And so this picture is really trying to 
show how, you know, Alan 
Turing was really very critical, but 
there are other people like Gordon 
Welchman, Dot Keane, and, and the 
folks from Poland, that informed all of 
this. 
University colleagues, and this whole 
thing was very much a connected, 
collective group of really bright people. 
Highly motivated, well funded, and they 
created this. 
So so let me go ahead and and pause now, 
and let you take a look at, at this film. 

