So I really like that video, it's 
real precious to me. 
We shot it in 1999. 
I don't know if you noticed, but I got a 
ponytail in back, and I got a Village 
People mustache. 
When I first came to the University of 
Michigan I thought I was pretty special 
so I grew the ponytail. I don't have a 
ponytail anymore.
I got, my hair's a little darker now. 
I, I really liked the moment where he 
started yelling at me, because I liked 
HTML. And HTML these days with HTML 5 is 
so much better than HTML was. 
He was exactly right that HTML wasn't 
elegant. But it was amazingly powerful 
at the same time.
And the fact that we could see it meant 
that people believed in it and it wasn't, 
it wasn't magic. 
The other thing that you might have 
noticed is that he had some very strong 
opinions about the design of what a web 
browser should be and they might not have 
seemed logical when you first listened to 
them. 
One thing he said was, every image had to 
pop up in the same screen and Mosaic had 
one page that replaced the whole thing 
and you saw the images inline, 
which is not what we wanted to do, 
that's what Robert said. 
That might sound illogical today with 
Farmville and Facebook and, you know, all 
these things, but you have to understand 
that in 1990 the network was very 
different, even than it was in 1995. 
It was a very slow network, and if you 
put images on every page, they would slow 
down terribly. 
And so what that user interface looked 
like is you had a document that was the 
text, bold, italics, these kinds of 
things, and when you clicked on 
something, you got a new page. 
And then it would take awhile for this 
page to display because the networks were 
really and truly slow, and the computers 
were slow as well. 
So that might sound to you as an 
irrational design choice but in the time 
of 1990, it was a completely rational 
design choice. 
And one of the things that sort of 
changed over time was that became less 
and less a rational design choice as the 
networks became faster, the computers 
became faster, and image became, images 
became more a natural thing that the 
technology was capable of handling. 
So continuing our story, we started at 
University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. 
We went to the University of Michigan. 
We got the NSF Net up. In 1990, CERN 
creates the World Wide Web. 
The web took a great step forward at 
Stanford University when the very first 
web server in America came up. 
Now the fact that's it's the very first 
web server is not actually all that 
important. 
The, what was important was what was on 
that web server. 
it was 300,000 physics papers at the 
SLAC, Stanford Linear Accelerator, 
stored in the database on a mainframe and 
you met and Cailliau, Robert Cailliau mentioned
this in his conversation about this. 
Now, what happened was is Paul 
Kunz, who'll you'll meet in just a 
moment, he, you know, he said I'll put my 
database. 
The database was well known and people 
had many ways of using it, but with the 
web, it made it much more easily used. 
And so, I think in a way Paul Kunz 
inadvertantly created the first search 
engine, the first reading of something 
that's mostly content that people read. 
Up to that point, Tim Berners-Lee and 
Robert were really trying to build 
something that allowed collective editing 
of information stored on servers all 
around the world. 
So let's take a listen to Paul Kunz. 

