≫> Hi, Charles Sevrence here. I'm at
CERN in Geneva, Switzerland, one of the
world's preeminent high energy physics
facilities. We were lucky enough to talk
to Robert Caillou, one of the 
co-founders of the World Wide Web. 
>> The big collaborations at CERN, and 
Steven here is is a member of one of them,
have people spread the all over the world 
and use CERN as the infrastructure to do the
experiments. And so obviously, the whole of
high energy physics has been this sort of
miniature information society since way
back when, as soon as there were networks
essentially. And so because we have this
need for spreading documentation around we
built these things like centralized
databases. There was CERN Doc, you know.
You could use it, but whatever. We had a,
well we still have have a large database of
high energy physics articles kept by
Stanford and you could get at it before
the web by knowing exactly what computer
to log in to over the network, blah, blah,
blah, blah. When the web came, all the
necessity of knowing which computer to
go to, what to say to that computer, and so
forth just disappeared. You know, people
put up these pages with the links and you
could just follow links and get to places
where you wanted to be and find
everything. And it was also all in the
same format so that was very important too
that we broke this proprietary commercial
system of vertical markets which, you know, 
don't let you get at anything except if
you stay with this particular company or
with that particular company. So that
horizontal split, the cut that we made
between the browsers on top and the
databases at the bottom was, I think,
essential to make it useful for us, but
also make it useful for everybody else.
And so that was, that was what it was like in
beginning and Tim and I did this all on
this NeXT machine here in about 1990. So
the first server was in about 1990, the
first, end of 1990. The first server in the
United States came out about a year later
at Stanford because of that database that
I was talking about before. >> Did you
and Tim feel like this was the big one, or
it was just business as usual? 
>> Well, in a sense of course, as I always
say, we called it World Wide Web in 1990
and, and Tim had in fact a name like that
just before that. So there was, in fact,
no way of building it smaller than the
Internet already was and the Internet was
everywhere. So there was no way we could
build it smaller. But the thing that we
probably did not expect or did not aim for
definitely, in the beginning at least, was
to have this be useful outside the
community of academics and Internet people
that existed then. See, the Internet came
outside the academic world only, what?
After, I would say also after 94,
right? After 94. >> That's 94
roughly, when I think of the beginning of
the current. >> Yeah, 94 is what I
call the, the Year of the Web, it's when
we had the first conferences, it's when,
you know, Mosaic got off the ground really
and when commerce started to notice it and
companies began to be formed in sense of a
exclusively with that in mind and that was
only then. Before that it was mainly
universities and academics. Gopher was
simpler and easier to install and easy to
populate, and that explained its easier
success for a while because both took off
at about the same time.
And because the web was somewhat
more difficult, it took somewhat longer.
But Gopher became also integrated in the
web browsers almost instantaneously. And
so, you know after that, after, after
short while that you saw what you could do 
with the web and what you could do with Gopher,
you went to the web. But it was
easy, much easier to install Gopher. This
is a very, which is why it had a, a sort
of bump where it went ahead of the web for
a while. The same is true with Mosaic.
Mosaic was just no good but easier to
install, right? And so it went ahead of
what we were trying to do. We, we were
completely killed in the browser
environment. Because what we tried to do
with our browsers was more difficult than
what Mosaic was trying to do. And so, you
know, this proved that a better thing
sometimes gets killed or takes much, much
longer to come up because the easier
thing, so like a virus, you know [laugh]
outgrows the other one. I think that the
real problem was that this development
system is so much better than anything
else that porting what we had here to any
other platform took a lot an order of magnitude 
more time. And the, for example, every time you
clicked here you had another window, every
time you clicked on a diagram, you
had the diagram in another window. When
you clicked on a map, you got the map in
PostScript, scalable, perfectly printable,
and so on and so forth. You try to port
that to another system you, you go
berserk. And this is the reason why in
Mosaic you had only one window and every
time you clicked you replaced the content
of that one window, which was not what we
wanted. Every time you see a page you got
the images inline so you scrolled and they
are gone and so this was not all we
wanted, this is horribly complicated for
the user and, and it's not efficient but
you know, it was the easiest way to do it
on the NeXT system. And so, you know, there
you go. So that thing spreads and, and if
you want to make. And you know, there's a
big difference between making an editor
and something that just puts up a page and
you can't do anything with that. So our
system from 1990 was also the editor. I mean, I
started. It's only after NeXT stopped
making hardware, and I had to go back from
a NeXT to a Macintosh that I had to learn
HTML. Right? I mean, before we produced
all of the documentation, the stuff, but
we never saw any, we never saw any HTML,
we never saw any URLs. Right? Because you
linked by saying link this to that, not by
typing in a URL. There was a special
window you could call up in which you
could type a URL if you needed
to. But it wasn't the usual thing. I mean
this, this navigation which says HTTP da,
da, da, da, you know, I learned all that
the hard way afterwards, that you have to
use that, because we've lost that system, right?
>> The interesting thing
though is that I, see, I found HTML a
glorious language. Now I'm not, I'm not
the average user but I like to write it. I
mean I enjoy it. ≫> Just, I mean,
God. Are you kidding? >> More as a
word processing. It's like Tex. >>
It's terrible. Yeah, right, right. It's
exactly as bad as Tex. That's exactly what
it is. It's exactly as bad as Tex. And can
you imagine in that the headings have levels
which are absolute? >> True. You
need a plus. Certainly. >> What! I
mean, come on.
HTML was, we just
didn't have. You must realize that we were
never more than four people here. Tim, and
myself, and a student each. Okay? So,
things like putting in serious effort into
thinking about HTML was a low priority
business and on, then, of course, by the
time it there was time to do that, it had
spread beyond repair, right? [laugh].
>> That's sort of like Unix, right?
>> Right. But of course, we have 
>> Like a virus.
>> Yeah, in a sense. We, we, we have XML
coming now, fortunately, so that'll,
that'll help. This machine here it's,
well, it's more than ten years old now.
It's got, it runs Unix but it has Unix
with a nice visual interface. It had some
other interesting things which was the,
which permitted us to do the development
of the web in such a small time, such a
short time. That was it had a completely
or it has a completely object oriented
development system in which there is
already supplied as part of the library
an editable text object and that was what
Tim used to make the first browser. And
this, this was all nice because it got us
there quickly and then we realized that,
you know, somehow the "real world" uses these
horrible machines and, you know, porting it
from here to make it available to these
horrible machines in the same elegant way
is an enormous amount of work. But half
way through 93, I think, we, we made a last
effort in outputing browsers that were
also geared to becoming editors, but then there
was just no hope.
