So again, I think Paul really created for
us the first search engine, and showed
that the web could be a mostly consume
environment and be extremely useful.
If you think about it, if there was no web
and there was no content, how would you
know that the web is a great way to view
content?
So Paul Kunz had the advantage that he had
a lot of content.
And it was content that at least the
physicists found extremely valuable.
And then people go, oh, I can see.
Matter of fact, I remember when I first
saw the web. I, I was, like, okay, fine.
It's got pictures, who cares?
Because other things like Gopher were just
as good. And then I saw the ability to go to
Federal Express and track a package, and I
go like, now that's a cool idea, right?
The goph-, Gopher couldn't do that. As a
matter of fact, in 1993, sort of three years
after the web was created, the web was
actually not all that popular.
1991 was the Paul Kunz, but that was
mostly physicists.
And a few nerds, myself included.
But in 1993, Gopher was a much better
product and it was a much more beloved
product.
And the problem again went down to, came
down to the fact that the network was so
slow that simple text-based things
worked better than highly graphical
things. As it, there's apocryphal story that
happened in March of 1993 where there was
a meeting of the Internet Engineering Task
Force that does standards for all these
things.
And they had a Bird of a Feather session
for Gopher and a Bird of a Feather session
for the World Wide Web.
And the Gopher session is full of people.
And they couldn't have enough in the room.
They were sitting on the floor and peeking
in the door.
And then, later, I wasn't at this meeting,
by the way.
Rich Wiggins, my co-host on the television
show was at this meeting.
And, what he tells me is at the Birds of a
Feathers meeting, there was almost nobody
there.
And Tim Berners-Lee was like, I've been
working on this thing for three years, and
it's better than Gopher, but nobody wants
to use it.
And the people in the room at that point
told him, they said it's just too complex,
it's too hard to get working.
And so, this is a long time ago and the
web was not assured to be a success at
that point.
It just wasn't really clear.
So, 1993 was kind of like, it was a real,
there's a lot of things that could have
been very different in 1993.
And I want to show you a commercial, and
there's a couple of these out there, from
1993 that one of the large
telecommunications vendors put out as a
national ad campaign.
And this is what the telecommunications
industry was thinking about, they saw it
all happening.
They saw this all happening, they knew it
was going to be big.
They knew it was going to allow
interactions in many ways.
They knew it, they weren't dumb, it's
wasn't like, oh what's going on?
No, not at all, they absolutely knew.
So this, this really wonderful series of
commercials is, is just quite amazing.
So take a look.
At the end you'll see, actually, what the
large telecommunications company's name
is.
So take a quick look.
I hope you got to see a couple of those.
I just, I just love watching them.
Over and over and over again and like
whoa, what a vision, what a beautiful
vision.
One of them has to do with like a personal
assistant in the shape of a dog.
So, again, sort of looking back at this
and looking at things that might not have
been, there's nobody that really makes the
connection that Steve Jobs might have had
some impact on the World Wide Web.
But in a way, he was actually quite
influential.
Steve Jobs, of course, founded Apple and
then was kicked out of Apple at, after the
Macintosh, and he started a new company
called NeXT.
And if you listen closely to what Robert
Cailliau says, and you listen closely to
what Paul Kunz says, and the computer that
was on my desk during this entire period
of the 1990s to 93, were NeXT
computers. NeXT was a bold, Unix-based,
highly-networked, high-definition display,
high-performance computer, that Steve Jobs
built when he formed the company NeXT
after he got fired from Apple.
Of course, he eventually came back to
Apple and the NeXT technology is
Macintosh, that's the Macintosh operating
system.
And so if you make a mistake in Macintosh, you
might see an error message that starts NS
something.
That's called NeXT Step, which is the
operating system on these NeXT computers.
For the first three years of the web, it
was pretty much only on the NeXT computer.
People would, even the server was, you
know, on the NeXT computer and the browser
was on the NeXT computer and so it's, the
NeXT computer really kind of did that.
I, I wrote an article.
In sort of a couple months after Steve
Jobs died for IEEE Computer Magazine's
January 2012 issue, that really sort of 
tried to, at least
from a historical perspective, point out
how important Steve Jobs may have been in
helping the Internet get formed.
So we started our journey at the University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
We got the NSF, the University of Michigan.
We created the web, we created the first
web server. And now we're going to come
back to where we started.
We're going to go back to the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
These are the folks that basically
exploded the web.
Moved the web from the academic space to
the commercial and end user space.
And there's all kind of things.
The network was growing.
Things were getting faster.
Personal computers were getting better at
a very rapid pace because the IBM PC is
almost ten years old and many computers,
they were getting quite fast in the,
in the 90s.
So the 1990s, our computing and the
display capabilities were were getting
better very rapidly.
And in this environment, NCSA at
Urbana-Champaign, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, built an open source web
browser that worked on Mac, Windows, and
Unix.
It was the first web browser that did this
and it, it was the thing that really made
it so average people who had PCs or Macs
in their home could get a network
connection and start enjoying all of this
new content that was coming up on the
World Wide Web.
After this, the NCSA staff, student
programmers, software developers, all
formed the company Netscape in order to
commercialize all this.
Joseph Hardin was the supervisor of the
software development group at NCSA that
was responsible
for building and releasing both the Mosaic
web browser and the httpd web server as
open source and gave them away free.
