>> Well, the database that was here at
SLAC was used by people around the
world, but with great difficulty because
they had to have an account on a mainframe.
Most people weren't familiar with
mainframes. And second of all, the
database language that you had to type in
was difficult. So before there was a web,
I invented a way for people to do what's
now called Instant Messaging. And to do a
query to the database without logging in.
And that improved access to the database,
but still had this terrible language of
the database machine to, to type in, in
order to do your query. A little later on,
people added an email interface so you
could send your query by email and you would
get your response back by email. So, when
I was at CERN in September 1991, and Tim
Berners-Lee dragged me into his office to
show me, to give me a demo of the web,
at first I wasn't very interested
but when he demonstrated doing
a query to a help system database on a
mainframe, I immediately put two and two
together and said, well if you can query a
help system on a mainframe, you can query
a database on a mainframe. Then I
started getting interested. The thing is
that, that we couldn't change the query
commands because that was built in the
database. But the web page could give you
examples and remind you what the query
would be. >> So did you have to
write it all from scratch? I mean, did you
write it from the protocol? Or was there
software that you used to make your first
web server? >> Well I used the CERN
server software, which was written in C.
And fortunately we had a C compiler on the
mainframe at the time, that time. It
wasn't very long that we had a mainframe
on a C compiler, but we had one. So all I
had to do was to write some extra C code
to get the query that the user had made
and turn it into the database
query. It was December twelfth, 1991 when
we installed our, our web server. And we,
we informed Tim Berners-Lee that day to
give it a try. The big boost came about a
month later in January, in southern
France, where there was a workshop on
computing topics for high energy and
nuclear physics. And at that workshop, Tim
Berners-Lee had a plenary talk. So he gave
his hour-long talk to about 200 physicists
from around the world. And as part of his
talk he gave a demo. And at the very end,
when most people I think were bored
most of the time. The worst thing
that software people want to think about
is documentation and he was pitching
documentation. But at the end of the talk,
he connected to the SLAC web server and
made a query. And that really dropped a
lot of jaws, because the instant
everybody knew the database, everybody
knew how hard it was to access. Okay?
And here he just clicked away and typed in a
few things for the query term and bang, the
results came back nicely formatted. So, I,
the way I say it, the interest in the web
went from about twenty people to 200
people in that hour, okay? Now those 200
people went back home, and if each one of
them told ten people, then within a week
the interest in the web grew to
2,000 people. So that was the
big turning point and I think Tim
recognizes that that was really the
kickoff. And I think the, the reason that
the web took off so quickly once the
commerce appreciated it and started to
realize it, it's a win-win situation.
Okay? It's a win for the customer
obviously because he can do price
comparisons, he can browse the airline
schedules on his own, and visualize what
he wants to see quickly, and cut and try
different things as much patience as he
has to get the price down. So it's much,
much better for the consumer. But what
about the provider? The airlines? Well,
it's much better for them because it's
just software that's running on machines,
okay? It's much lower cost for them.
And, and so they're winning, too. I point
out in my talk about the web near the end,
sort of a punchline, that in doing big
science, we're solving, we're finding
solutions to problems that the general
public don't know they have. So, who would
predict that out of high energy physics
research you would come, something like
the web would, would come up? I think that
would be unpredictable. But, in hindsight,
you can see that it was a natural place
for, for the web to have been invented.
