Triggered mostly by the release of the
Windows and the Mac version of Mosaic,
1994 was distinctly different than 1993.
The staff at NCSA went and founded
Netscape in April 1994.
The first World Wide Web Conference was
held in Switzerland.
Shortly thereafter, the other first World
Wide Web conference was held in Chicago.
There's some interesting stuff about that
in these books. [laugh].
The books, Robert Cailliau's and Tim
Berners-Lee's book talks a little bit about that.
In October, 1994 Tim left CERN and went to
form the World Wide Web Consortium.
And then by the end of the year, Windows
95 Beta 2 with an Internet browser was
there, with TCP/IP built in. And so if you
really think about, I mean it's not even a
whole year, it's almost six months where
the world changed forever.
And so, at this point, now money is coming
into it.
Up to that point, it was mostly ideas and
research, but now money is coming in and
we start seeing a transition.
So Netscape was on the forefront of doing
this, and Netscape basically took the
open source product, they started kind of
competing just to build a browser.
But they quickly decided that they would
go turn the browser and their web server
more proprietary and try to create
distributed computing applications using
proprietary things that Netscape would
build unique to themselves, and they would
attack Microsoft.
The moment it became clear that Netscape
was going to produce a way, to, to
develop software on Mac, Windows, and
Linux portably, then Microsoft got
worried. Because then the operating system
wouldn't matter, and Window, Microsoft had
put so much into the Windows operating
system, that if the operating system
didn't matter, it would really,
tremendously threaten Microsoft's
business, hence Windows 95, with TCP/IP
and a free web browser.
So, Netscape sort of scared.
Now, as Microsoft tried to buy Netscape,
Netscape refused to sell, wanting more
money. And then Microsoft vowed to destroy it.
And as Microsoft was coming after
Netscape, first Netscape tried to compete
by building better and better software,
like the JavaScript language, which we'll
meet Brendan Eich in a moment. And then
after that they tried to sort of
switch from being the proprietary bad guys
and go become more the open source good
guys. And that kind of blew up in their
face and
they built this open source Mozilla, which
eventually became the Mozilla Foundation,
which eventually begat Firefox.
So now, what I want to do is I want to,
you to meet two people, both of whom now
are the senior leadership at the 
Mozilla Foundation.
Brendan Eich is the CTO of the Mozilla
Foundation, but he'll really tell us
about 1995, 
where he invented JavaScript in ten days
as part of Netscape.
And then we'll meet Mitchell Baker, who
was the founder of, one of the founders
of Mozilla.
And she will talk about how Netscape kind
of, fortunes declined, got purchased by
AOL, and fortunes declined even worse.
And how they basically pulled the Netscape
codebase out to form the Mozilla codebase,
which then became Firefox codebase.
And the Firefox, of course, had this great
idea, that Mitchell will tell you about,
of having a search box.
And they made tons and tons of money, as
Mitchell will tell you about.
So, up next, Brendan Eich of the Mozilla
Foundation and Mitchell Baker of the
Mozilla Foundation.
