let me summar then , the main lesson from our first tableau .
non intuit behavior crop up even in elementari set where on doe not anticip surpris .
for instanc , as we have seen , in a prolong sequenc of coin toss , it is not at all unlik that on observ a success run , or a failur run for that matter .
alreadi the need for a formal theori , a formal foundat , on which you can erect thi edific , is manifest .
these result ar not just pure academ curios .
thei appli to a varieti of set .
for instanc , result of run can be us to postul or put forward a principl statist test for hypothes such as the exist of a hot hand in sport .
the probabilist william feller ha lament , we mai fairli lament that intuit probabl is insuffici for scientif purpos , but it is a histor fact .
what then , is the worth of a formal theori ?
from the mathemat point of view , the worth of a theori is the rich , unexpect develop that aris out of it .
and from the applic point of view , the worth of the theori is in the fit of the theori to model and observ data .
in these , the modern theori of probabl ha been wildli success .
in the next lectur , we will begin with a review of basic combinatori element , the basic art of count .
tableau two , part on .
element of count .
histor , in the theori of chanc , gambl and game of chanc had a determin effect , and in these set , the primari goal wa to be abl to count numer altern accur and correctli .
in such set , elementari combinatori argument becom of import .
now , thi kind of count , while import , it is not central to our purpos , but we do need the veri basic element .
thi is the kind of materi that on should see ordinarili .
sometim in high school , where on see exampl of order sampl , and in particular , the binomi coeffici .
thi materi then , constitut a review of the veri basic element of count .
for mani listen , thi will be materi that thei ar veri familiar with , and if thi is the case , you should skip ahead to the summari slide and take a brief note of the notat and particular concept involv befor proceed .
for the other , proce .
in mani set involv chanc , we start with finit popul .
let's sai , an exampl , five letter , a , b , c , d , and e .
now , in set like thi , the semant ar rare of import .
thei add color to the pictur sometim .
thei add to the stori .
but in term of evalu of chanc , thei ar typic not veri relev .
so instead of all five abstract object , we could have , for instanc , <num> differ pear .
all five differ color , or ball , or what have you .
the particular of the object ar not relev for our purpos .
though , as i did sai , thei do add color and sometim a , a feel for the subject .
so let's go back to an abstract set where we can look at the problem as a whole divorc of it particular .
so , let's go back to a collect of five object .
in thi case , let's call them a , b , c , d and e .
now , mathemat symbol is import here becaus we want to be abl to accur describ the object in the discuss to each other and to stranger .
so in accord with thi , when you talk about a popul , a collect , a set , we think of a set of object , where the order is not particularli import , or relev .
of cours you can imagin lai it out on a tabl in some arbitrari order .
but of cours it becom hard to get a feel for the object under consider .
and especi when write it down on a recent page , we tend to list them , on , two , three , four , five , a , b , c , d , e , and some order .
but to reinforc the idea for us that the order , order is not import , we introduc some symbol , some notat , some terminolog .
so , curli parenthes , curli bracket around the object of interest suggest visual that thi is a set .
a set , a collect , a popul where order is not import .
now onc you start the set like thi , a simpl experi would involv collect element from the set .
thi is call a sampl .
so here for exampl is an order sampl of three element .
select a , and then c , and then c again .
for exampl a bosc pear , an orang pear , and a yellow pear .
three differ element .
now , you notic that in thi select .
i have select the element c twice , but the order in fact here , make a differ and i make that explicit by put the object under a differ kind of parenthesi , round bracket .
the round bracket ar a visual indic for me , that in fact the order of specif matter .
now , i have three differ possibl order of these two object , a and c , chosen thrice .
it could be a , c , c , as in the first line , or c , a , c , as in the second line , or , c , c , a , as in the third line .
and a littl introspect will convinc you that in fact , there ar no other order of the object a and c .
where c is chosen twice , and a is chosen onc .
now , what if we choos three object from thi collect , but with the caveat that an object can not be repeat ?
now , thi is a provinc of sampl without replac .
so here is an exampl .
suppos we collect the object a , c , and d in the order a first , c next , and then d .
now , a littl think will convinc you that there ar six possibl wai where you could have select these three object , list as i have shown you .
of cours , on ha to be veri care in make such an order , becaus you don't want to miss ani order , nor do you want to count an order twice .
but in a set like thi , it's fairli transpar , and a littl , a littl taut , will tell you exactli how mani possibl .
so far so good .
i'll now describ for you how we can select three object from a given set of five object with replac and without replac .
how about we select three object and we do not care about which order we select them .
in other word , we select a subpopul or a subset of the three .
in thi case i've given you a subset of three element , a , c , and d .
and again notic , visual , i'll put curli bracket around those three to indic to us that these ar three element and their order of specif doe not matter .
i could have said d , c , a increas in curli bracket or c , a , d or ani other version but as long as thei enclos them in curli bracket , the order doe not matter , it is a set .
to summar , set ar enclos in curli bracket .
order sampl with order of specif matter ar enclos in round bracket .
if you have an order sampl , then the sampl mai be with replac where object or element ar allow to be repeat or without replac , where repetit is forbidden .
each object can aris at most onc in that sequenc .
so thei kei element that we've delin so far ar the idea of a finit set , or popul and select from that set to form sampl .
the sampl mai be order .
thei mai be with replac or without replac .
and if thei're unord , we call them subset or sub popul .
now that we've understood the three basic element of sampl , we promptli gener and think about a set in abstract .
so here we go .
suppos now we have a finit set .
thi is what we might call the univers set , colloqui , we might sai it's the popul , from which we ar draw element .
now we don't want to a priori , put a restrict on how mani element we have in that popul .
certainli not , becaus we could have five , we could have ten , we could have <num> million .
we search around for some wai of describ how mani element we have .
and of cours , we resort to algebra , and we sai , we need to give the number of element in the popul a name , and what name could we give it ?
inevit , we call it n .
why n ?
well , becaus it is inconceiv that we call it anyth els .
long tradit and custom , go back to earli school dai ha condit us to call n an integ number for some integ variabl .
so without further ado , we'll sai the popul ha got n element , and of cours now , becaus n is not particularli specifi , i'm run out of letter in the alphabet to describ the member of the popul .
so , we'll us subscript , on , two , three , four , through n , to describ element of thi abstract popul .
and so , a popul of finit set is a1 through a sub n , enclos in curli bracket to remind ourselv that we ar deal with a popul where the order doe not matter .
now , it is from such a popul that we ar go to be talk about sampl .
and of cours , we're go to be talk about finit sampl .
so , let's begin .
if on ha a sampl , well , how mani member should we have in a sampl ?
well , let's sai , k .
k , again , is a gener number .
it could be three , five , seven , <num> , a hundr , depend on the problem at hand .
it's algebra break variabl .
suppos on gener an order sampl of size k .
well , what should the member of the popul be , in thi order sampl ?
well , it could be the third element follow by the seventh element .
mayb the third element again .
mayb the 103rd element , the 52nd element , and so forth .
that give you on particular order sampl .
to speak about it in abstract , let us identifi the idioci of the first element .
let's go and sai we call it j1 .
.
the index of the second element , let's sai , is a j2 element .
the index of the third , j3 and so forth .
the index of the last element , jk .
the notat is admittedli get a littl cumbrou but it is unavoid .
i'm go to have to have some wai of describ which element i've pick .
so , let us sai the element of the abstract sampl ar aj1 , aj2 , through ajk .
if the sampl is with replac , the element of the origin popul could be repeat in the sampl at variou locat .
if the sampl is without replac , then of cours , each element in that sampl is uniqu and cannot be repeat .
what about if on doe not care about order ?
let's sai we ar look at a , the self same collect of element , aj1 to ajk , now without repetit .
and we sai , i'm interest in thi ensembl , thi collect .
we promptli encas them in curli bracket , and sai , thi is a subset or colloqui , the sub popul in which we ar interest .
so here is the abstract set .
a finit popul of n element .
a sampl of size k .
the sampl mai be order with or without replac , in which case we encas it in curl , in round bracket , or it could be unord , where we don't care about order ; it could be a subset , in which case we enclo , enclos it in curli bracket .
our next order of busi is ask how mani differ wai we can sampl under variou condit .
let's start with a veri simpl and elementari problem .
thi is part of a genr of problem call ball and urn problem .
the languag is archaic .
and who us urn anymor ?
except perhap in funerari circumst .
but it is tradit and we will continu to us it .
so for us an urn is a receptacl , a box , a cell .
you would imagin that these ar metaphor urn , metaphor box , thei ar infinit distens , thei can , you can put in as mani element as you want insid them .
right ?
so thei ar not limit in capac , now , now consid a set like thi .
suppos we have three ball , i have indic them for you in color .
a peach color ball .
a green ball and a purpl ball .
and five urn .
the urn and the ball ar consid implicitli to be distinguish .
for exampl , the ball ar clearli given , you have three differ color .
or thei could have the number on , two , and three on them .
someth like a snooker or a billiard ball set .
the run likewis , ar consid to be distinguish , and i've indic thi by give them number on , two , three , four , five .
now , here's a question , how mani wai can i put these three ball into these five urn ?
so , here ar possibl exampl .
so the peach color ball could fly over and land in urn <num> .
the green ball could decid to fly all the wai over to urn <num> .
and the purpl ball perhap also decid to go land in urn <num> .
when you think about thi , if you want to describ the experi .
all you do , you have to do to tell me is tell me where did the peach color ball lie ?
where did the green ball lie ?
and where did the purpl ball lie ?
now ahead of time , we agre on a coven .
we decid on a mode of interact and oper .
we decid on a dictionari of translat .
for how we describ thing .
so you could tell me that i'm go to tell you first where the peach color ball goe , and then where the green color ball goe , and then where the purpl ball goe .
now , the moment you do that , you can compact all of thi by give me three number .
the urn order , the urn number , where these ball in thi order , peach , green , purpl , have end up .
and so , in thi particular exampl , all you'd have to do is give me <num> , <num> and <num> .
and that describ complet the experi for me .
now let's step back and abstract thi and try to understand how thi would work in gener .
the idea now is i've abstract the urn and ball metaphor and said here's what we do .
let's decid on a priori order for the ball .
in our case , peach , green , purpl .
and then simpli specifi a tripl of number in order , repres which urn these ball land up in .
here is an abstract .
the ball ar specifi in a particular order .
rememb , the ball ar distinguish by color , by number , or otherwis .
and where thei have land up give me a tripl of number .
in our case <num> , <num> , <num> .
in gener specifi three number , three indic .
let's call them j1 , j2 , and j3 .
these three indic ar number between <num> and <num> .
and repres , on at a time , where each of these three ball have land .
love .
now , we have some abstract .
from here , suppos we ask , how mani wai can you specifi these three number ?
notic alreadi , the moment we have compact the notat like thi , .
certain mode , or direct of thought ar becom clearer .
it is much harder , when we're deal with ball , and urn , and thing ar move around .
but the moment we have abstract the essenc , the mathemat essenc of what wa go on , the problem ha simplifi .
there is now a rout to solut .
let's think about thi .
the first number , j1 , repres where the peach ball ha gone , could be ani on of five possibl .
beauti , let's hold on to that .
the second number , j2 , repres where the green ball ha gone , ha also five differ possibl .
noth is preclud , rememb the urn ar infinit distens , you can put in as mani ball as you want and noth the problem statement prevent you from us an urn you have us befor .
so there ar five distinct possibl for j2 .
and likewis there ar five distinct possibl for j3 for the purpl ball .
now an elementari principl of count , which you all have learn in kindergarten , perhap .
mayb in second or third grade , or perhap in fifth grade .
is that independ possibl multipli .
thi is the essenc of a multipl tabl .
and therefor , the number of wai in which you can specifi , and order tripl like thi , is exactli .
<num> time <num> time <num> .
of cours , thi is <num> .
but we will ordinarili not worri about simplifi such number .
the logic behind the calcul , for our purpos , is much more import than the final answer .
so the idea here is that the number of urn multipli three time .
of cours from veri earli on in school we have a short compact notat for thi .
we call it <num> to the power <num> or <num> cube .
thi is a power notat with which we ar veri familiar .
so at end what have we conclud ?
so in fine there ar .
<num> to the power <num> distinct wai in which three distinguish ball can be distribut into five distinguish urn .
onc we've understood the basic principl , we veri quickli abstract out and try to find a gener answer .
so , let's put in some notat .
it's go to look a littl formid at first sight , but if you keep thi exampl in mind , it'll becom transpar .
so , here is the question .
suppos i start with a popul with n element .
a1 through an enclos enclos in curli bracket becaus it is a set , the order doe not matter .
suppos i select from thi popul an order sampl of size k .
i'm select three urn out of the five to place my three ball in some order .
i'm select k earn out of my n to place my k ball in some order .
how mani differ wai can i specifi thi ?
how mani differ order sampl of size k ar there when sampl is with replac from an underli finit popul of size n ?
that is , that's a lot of verbiag .
but the mathemat notat compact all of that through our , thi dictionari of translat , into someth veri simpl and suscept of easi analysi .
and analysi is exactli the same as befor .
the first number , the first urn from the first ball can be specifi in n wai .
the second urn for the second ball , can be specifi independ in n wai .
similarli , n for the third and n for the kth .
independ possibl multipli , and therefor there ar n time n time n , k time number of wai in which we can specifi an order sampl of size k , when sampl is with replac .
and of cours .
in our usual notat , we call thi n to power k .
okai .
now that we've understood how to count in situat when sampl is with replac , let's move on to a set where sampl is without replac .
so let's chang the problem a littl bit , right ?
ball and urn ar get a littl old .
let's try thi on .
again , the problem is quit elementari , right ?
but here's a metaphor .
how mani differ wai ar there of distribut three flag onto sai , five flagpol ?
on retrospect , is there anyth differ from the previou problem ?
i replac ball by flag , urn by stick , but haven't done anyth fundament differ .
and a littl thought might convinc you that , ye , oh ye , there might be on thing that's differ .
perhap it is not advis to put two flag onto the same pole .
on might start an intern incid .
okai , so what could on do ?
well , in which case , each flag ha to have a distinguish pole all to itself .
oh , let's see what happen now .
so , for exampl , the blue flag could go on to the fourth pole .
the green flag could go on to the first pole .
the purpl flag could go on to the second pole .
now , how do you describ thi compactli ?
well , in exactli the same wai we did befor .
all we have to do is agre on an order for flag , in thi case blue , green , purpl , in that order , <num> , <num> , <num> , and specifi by number , a tripl of number identifi which flag stick these flag land on .
so in our case , bob's your uncl , there we go , <num> , <num> , <num> .
and that compact tripl captur the mathemat essenc of thi entir problem .
how do we abstract thi ?
of cours , the number in the three locat could be quit arbitrari .
and so here we go .
if we put in the three fla , three flag onto these five pole , the three locat could be specifi by an order tripl , j1 , j2 , j3 .
again , j1 repres the locat of the blue flag .
j2 , the locat of the green flag .
j3 , the locat of the purpl flag .
and now we want to count how mani wai it's go to be possibl to have such deploy .
you understand , of cours , that the metaphor of flag and pole here , could be replac by anyth els you like .
for exampl , we could have had three ball and five urn .
and with the understand that in thi new experi , an n is not allow to be reus .
in other word , thi is a question of sampl urn or flag tick without replac .
well , let's do the count .
the first number , the first flag , could go onto ani of five pole .
that give you five possibl .
the moment you place a first flag on a pole , then you onli have four pole left .
rememb , sampl pole is without replac .
which mean that the second flag , the green flag , ha got four possibl to select from .
and that leav onli three possibl for the purpl flag .
by the basic rule of count independ possibl multipli and therefor the number of wai you can specifi flag stick for your three flag is <num> time <num> time <num> .
now that's <num> .
but the number again is not particularli import for our purpos .
the logic is what is import .
now thi look a veri much like what we had in the previou slide .
there it wa <num> time <num> time <num> , here , it's <num> time <num> time <num> , becaus re sampl element is prohibit .
but , the structur is veri similar .
it look like a power .
well , why don't we put in some notat to captur thi kind of structur .
which is reminisc of an ordinari power .
we call thi <num> time <num> time <num> , <num> to the <num> fall .
we repres it with a five with a power three and an underscor under three to remind ourselv that thi is realli not an ordinari common garden varieti power that we saw in elementari school .
but a new kind of power .
thi is a fall power .
the five tell us we have a product of term start with five .
the three about tell us there ar go to be three term in the product and the underscor tell us that each term is on less than the previou term .
<num> time <num> time <num> .
thi is sometim call pochhamm's symbol or the fall factori and we will see why in just a moment .
right , so again , symbol , and thi is suppos to evok in you a familiar idea , the object of a power .
but thi is a slight variat on that particular theme .
now , onc you've got thi basic idea in place , we jump forward and we gener everyth .
so , consid a popul now a set of n object .
so these n object repres your n urn , your n flag stick , or what have you .
you ar go to select from them , but the select is go to be without replac .
so , let's sai we select k object without replac , we have an order sampl of size k .
how mani ar there ?
well , the first number can be specifi in mani wai .
have specifi on number , .
that particular number , that particular flag stick is skew .
you have to select from the remain n mile on flag stick for the next number , and then from the remain n minu <num> for the number after that .
and you go on through k term .
the last element is select from n minu k minu <num> element , which have alreadi been specifi .
and so , here we go .
the number of wai in which we can select k object in an order sampl from a popul of size n , where sampl is without replac , is n to the k fall .
a product of k term start at n .
each term on less than the previou term .
now , befor proceed , i should sai a word about thi unusu terminolog fall factori .
now , where doe thi come from ?
let's go back on more time , and take a look at thi in a slightli sanit set .
so , suppos we have three ball .
our familiar peach , green , purpl ball , and we ar interest in how mani differ order of these ball we can achiev .
so let's try to look at thi , all right ?
so , we can write down by inspect or by trial and error , by hit or miss , a certain sequenc of ball .
and thei appear on your screen on your left .
now , how do we know we've got all arrang , right ?
there ar six differ arrang .
and the idea is to be veri , veri , veri , veri systemat .
so thi is an exampl of what's call a lexicograph arrang .
now , in a combinatori set , it is exig that we ar veri precis .
we don't miss element , and we don't doubl count element .
these , in fact , ar the <num> golden rule of combinator .
don't over count and don't under count .
of cours , it sound complet banal and trite .
right ?
of cours , you don't want to over count , and you don't want to under count .
how do you avoid over count ?
how do you avoid under count ?
the idea is to be veri systemat , to set thing up as you would , for exampl , in the index of a book or when you count page .
thi is the lexicon , and that is the basi of a lexicograph arrang .
a is befor b is befor c .
on is befor two , befor three .
and in our dictionari of translat , green is befor purpl is befor peach .
and then you go ahead and set up veri systemat a system of arrang , and we have six .
thi is excel .
now , let's put thi in the quantic of sampl .
suppos we start with a popul , a set of n distinct object .
how mani differ wai can these object be arrang ?
in the board in front of you we've got an arrang of three object and there ar six possibl arrang .
now , when you think about n object you realiz that what we're try to do is specifi a sequenc , an order sequenc of n object , where no object is repeat .
that is what we mean by an arrang .
a permut .
in other word , everi such arrang result in an order sampl of n element .
in thi case , k is equal to n .
these ar select form a popul without replac from a popul of n element which mean that everi on of your n element in the popul appear exactli onc in thi order sampl .
oh , but we know the answer to thi .
when we select k without replac from popul of size n , we add n to the k fall possibl .
when we select n out of a popul of size n , then by definit we have n to the n fall .
recal that thi fall notat mean that you start a product at n .
the thing in the expon tell you how mani term there ar in the product .
in thi case , where there ar n term in the product , and each term is on less than the previou term .
and when you work it through , you find , you start at n , n minu <num> , n minu <num> , and by the time you get to the nth , or last , term , you hit <num> .
in other word , on the right , you have a product of all the number from <num> through n .
of cours , we have anoth name for thi .
thi is what we call the factori .
n factori .
so thi is now the origin of the terminolog , a fall factori notat .
if you look at n to the k fall .
and you select k to be n itself , you'll get back n factori .
and so now , thi is a mnemon , a visual featur which tell you what thi thing mean .
it is relat to a factori .
you know , it's veri much like a duck you might observ .
if you see an object , if it walk like a duck , if it quack like a duck , it's got to be a duck .
if thi thing walk like a factori , if it quack like a factori , well , it's got to be a factori .
and therefor , we call it a factori , or more precis , a fall factori .
now , a littl convent make a life easier , smooth our analysi park .
what if n is <num> .
by convent , we sai that <num> factori is <num> .
thu far , we've look at set where we have an order sampl from an underli finit set or popul , and the sampl wa with or without replac , and the count , therefor becam ordinari power or fall power .
now let's move on to a set where we extract a subpopul .
in other word , a sampl without an implicit order from the popul at larg .
so , let's start with a veri simpl exampl .
let's go back to a ball metaphor .
let's sai we have five ball .
i've given you five differ color .
or , you could just as well call them five letter a through e , or give them ani other name you care to .
the semant of the problem ar of no interest to us .
it is a numer count that matter .
right , as i said , the semant add color to the problem but don't add to it's logic content .
so , i have five ball .
how mani differ wai can we split these five ball , these five object , into two group ?
on subpopul with two element and anoth subpopul with three element .
so for exampl let's sai we pick our favorit peach , green , and purpl ball from thi collect of five .
now here's on group of three , notic that we have implicitli specifi the remain element .
the blue and the red ball ar the on which ar in the other group .
so it , it suffic alreadi to specifi on of the two sub popul .
the other is implicitli specifi if you know the whole popul .
now , look at thi particular subpopul .
peach , green , purpl .
the order doe not matter .
but if we order them we could specifi them , sai lexicograph , in six differ wai .
and here's all these order .
now , the moral of the stori is thi .
for everi particular collect of three ball , there ar six distinguish order creat order sampl of these three ball .
now the gener principl then becom much clearer .
how do we back to do thi in gener ?
well , it'll be conveni to go ahead and abstract out the color .
the color ar nice , thei're visual attract but thei get in the wai of a formal appreci of what's go on .
let's replac the ball by letter and if we did that then we have a set where you replac the <num> ball and their particular arrang by popul and order sampl .
so , you will get a subpopul a , c , d correspond to the green ball , the purpl ball , and the peach color ball .
and the order sampl on your left tell you all arrang of these three object .
at the high level , what you've got is on subpopul of three element to which we have six distinguish order sampl .
it is clear now that everi subpopul of three element ha a distinguish collect of six order in an order sampl .
and therefor the number of differ subpopul you could engend , multipli by six , or more precis in our context , three factori , will give us all the possibl wai of engend a , an order sampl of size three where sampl is without replac .
rememb insid a set an object can not be repeat .
now let's do thi again .
everi sub popul of size three in gender in order distinguish sampl of six differ possibl .
therefor the number of differ wai in which you could engend a popul , a sub popul of size three .
if you multipli that number by six , you must get all possibl wai of specifi three distinct element without repetit .
veri good .
if that is the case then veri simpli the number of distinguish subpopul of size three from the popul of size five is obtain first by look at all possibl order sampl of size three without replac .
thi annot is five to the three fall .
and divid that by the repetit , thi factor six or three factori .
of cours , thi simplifi .
five time four time three divid by six , and thi is ten .
but the actual answer is not particularli german for our purpos .
the logic idea behind the construct of the answer is what is relev .
now , thi is a slightli more complex object than what we've seen hitherto , but it's not veri hard .
it count a total number of sampl and divid by a repetit factor .
thi is a number of subpopul .
we give thi a special name .
and thi name is a famou name histor .
it's call the binomi coeffici .
we call thi interminolog .
five chose three .
we repres it by write a five on top and a three below and enclos the whole in round bracket .
that entir object on the left is call the binomi coeffici .
again we sai it enword <num> choos <num> .
and the terminolog expos the mechan of what it is we ar do .
there ar <num> object in the popul , and we ar select <num> .
<num> , choos <num> .
thi is a famou histor object .
in fact thi particular object wa at the heart of isaac newton's discoveri of the calculu , but more on that later .
now onc we have thi idea , thi principl in mind , we should veri quickli extrapol , gener , and come up with a gener answer for thi problem .
so let's go back now to a gener , gener popul of n element .
again , let's sai a on through a n .
the , what these object ar , ar not germain .
thei can , thei could be ball .
thei could be color .
thei could be number .
thei could be letter .
it is immateri .
all that is materi , that is german , is that there ar n distinguish element in your popul .
from these you wish to select a subpopul of k element .
rememb a subpopul mean that no element can be repeat , it is a set .
how do we do thi ?
well exactli the same wai we did thi befor .
specifi all order sequenc , sampl of size k without replac .
that is go to give us n to the k fall .
but then there's go to be an over count becaus of all these permut of everi particular sub , subpopul .
our k factori permut divid by k factori and that is exactli is go to be the number of wai in which you can select k object out of n .
n choos k .
just as in the case of a factori we like to make provis for when on or more of the index term ar ident zero .
so as a matter of convent we sai that n chose zero is ident on for all non neg integ n .
again , thi is a matter of convent and it smooth calcul as we move forward .
now that we have come to a right understand of the mechan of sampl , with and without replac , and of measur subpopul , it is now time to test your understand of these three concept .
let us go back to an ancient and vener idea in the game of chanc , that of a plai card .
let's start with a standard pack of <num> plai card .
these card come in four suit , tradition call spade , heart , diamond , and club , each suit have <num> card , usual show the face valu two through nine , and then the distinguish valu , jack , queen , king , and ac .
right , the particular of these number don't matter for our purpos .
all that matter is that there ar four distinguish suit and <num> card per suit .
so , here is the first problem .
take five such pack of card .
arrang them on the tabl .
flip open the first card in each of the five stack .
how mani distinct sequenc of card would you be abl to see ?
paus the lectur at thi point while you figur thi out .
when you ar readi , restart .
now that you're back , let's examin how we might analyz thi problem .
five pack place in a row .
now , thi is equival to sai let's take a pack , on pack of card , shuffl it , creat essenti a random sequenc , and flip open the top and see what you get .
write that down .
put it back , shuffl it again , flip open the top card .
see what you get .
that is a second valu you'll write down .
do thi five time .
the second experi i've given you is formal equival to the first experi , where you have five distinguish pack and you open on card from each pack .
good , but onc you understand that what we're realli do is specifi on out of <num> distinguish card , and you're go to do it five time , you'll realiz that what you have specifi is an order sampl of five element , where the element can be repeat .
it is possibl to draw the same card again and again , and again , albeit , it is rather unlik .
all right , how mani differ wai , of cours , thi is sampl with replac , and therefor , the answer is go to be , <num> time <num> time <num> time <num> time <num> , or <num> to the power of <num> and , you see thi huge number , about <num> million possibl .
beauti .
now , let's take a look at anoth version of thi problem .
take a standard pack of card , shuffl it , and distribut on card to each of five distinguish player , on , two , three , four , five .
how mani differ sequenc can thei get ?
paus the lectur again , and when you ar readi , restart .
now that you're back , let's consid the problem anew .
we have a singl pack of card and five distinguish individu , on , two , three , four , five .
we ar distribut card on per individu .
it becom immedi appar , that what we ar specifi is an order sampl of five card , arrang by individu on through five .
and sinc we're us just on pack of card , it becom clear that no card can be repeat .
each individu get a distinguish card .
in other word , the number of such sequenc correspond to sampl without replac , and therefor , the number of possibl , possibl , excus me , is <num> to the <num> fall .
and that , if we work it out , give you someth like <num> million .
the differ between thi case and the earlier case , when sampl wa with replac , is rel modest , and a littl introspect will convinc us that thi , in fact , sure is reason .
when you have larg popul , in thi case <num> , <num> , and we ar select a modest number in our sampl , the chanc of a replic should be small , and inde it is .
now , let's move on to the third problem .
read it , paus , try to do it , think about it , and when you're readi , resum the lectur .
now that you're back , let's go on to a more real set .
let's go to the game of poker .
now , poker is a game of chanc , where individu player , at least in elementari version of thi game , get five card from a pack .
now , observ that onc a player get five card , then she simpli keep them in her hand , and the particular order she keep them doe not matter .
how mani differ poker hand ar there ?
again , paus the lectur , think about it , see if you can work your wai through to a solut , and then restart the lectur .
okai , now you ar back .
when we think about thi , we realiz that we ar specifi five card out of a pack of <num> .
thi constitut a standard poker hand , but the order doe not matter .
in other word , we're choos five from <num> card , and of cours the answer , inevit , is a binomi coeffici <num> choos <num> .
evalu it , and you'll find there ar approxim <num> million poker hand .
consid that thi is a vast number .
thi is immedi on of the reason why poker continu to fascin .
it is not a game like tic tac toe , where you have such , so few altern that you veri quickli understand all of them .
in poker , you have a larg number of possibl altern .
that make the game interest .
but the number is a small fraction of how mani order sampl there ar .
the moment you look at subpopul , you decreas number dramat .
next problem is that of bridg .
now , bridg is a card game that continu to be popular in the ag of the internet becaus of it rich structur .
the wai bridg is plai is with a standard pack of <num> card .
there ar four protagonist , or player .
thei ar tradition call north , south , east , and west .
the pack of <num> card is distribut <num> a piec , to each of the four player , north , south , east , and west .
each distribut of , of card to these four player is call a hand at bridg .
how mani distinguish deal of hand at bridg ar there ?
paus the lectur , and when you're readi , re start it .
well , now that you're back , let's see how we might analyz thi .
we should have a formal procedur and understand of how we're , we ar go to analyz thi , to avoid the peril of over count and under count , scylla and charybdi .
we want to avoid either extrem .
now , so , how do we go about do thi ?
well , let's sai we're go to start by specifi the card that north ha , follow by the card that east ha , follow by the card that south ha , follow by the card that west ha .
okai , here's a , an understand , a memorand , memorandum of understand between us .
we're go to specifi card in thi particular sequenc .
well , let's see .
how mani wai can you specifi the <num> card that north ha ?
now rememb , order doe not matter , and therefor , north can have <num> choos <num> wai in which the hand for north can be specifi .
specifi a subpopul of <num> card out of <num> .
veri well , so we have <num> choos <num> wai of specifi north's hand .
have specifi north's hand , we have <num> card fewer in the deck .
we have <num> card remain .
of those <num> , east get <num> , and there ar <num> choos <num> wai of specifi east's hand from the remain card .
now , onc east's hand is specifi , there ar <num> card remain , and there ar <num> choos <num> wai of specifi south's hand from the remain card , which leav us with <num> card .
and there ar exactli <num> choos <num> , or on wai of give those <num> card to west .
okai .
multipli the possibl , independ possibl multipli , we obtain the number of possibl deal of hand at bridg , is given by a product of binomi coeffici , <num> choos <num> , time <num> choos <num> , time <num> choos <num> , time <num> choos <num> .
and thi is a huge number .
thi number is approxim <num> time <num> to the power <num> .
five follow by <num> zero .
thi is a magnific larg number .
to put it in proper context , consid that the number of brain cell in all the creatur that have ever exist on earth might be a number like someth like , let's sai , oh , about <num> to the power <num> .
about <num> , <num> time less than thi number .
thi explain , in part , the endur popular of bridg .
there's a vast , finit but vast , number of bridg hand , so larg that we're not go to exhaust all the possibl befor the solar system dissip .
so , at thi point , let's take stock , right .
so , what have we done ?
we figur out that from a finit popul , sampl can be done in three distinguish kind of wai .
order sampl , which can be in two flavor , with and without replac .
and sub popul where the order doe not matter .
to summar , if we have a finit set of popul of size n , and we gener a sampl of size k from that set .
if the sampl is order , and sampl is with replac , then there ar n to the power k differ wai you can gener such a sampl .
if sampl is without replac , then there ar n to the k fall wai of gener such a sampl .
and if on is interest in a subpopul , then there ar exactli n choos k wai of engend such a subpopul .
so , at thi point , let's take stock , right ?
so what have we done ?
we figur out that from a finit popul , sampl can be done in three distinguish kind of wai , order sampl , which can be in two flavor , with and without replac , and subpopul , where the order doe not matter .
to summar , if we have a finit set of popul of size n and we gener a sampl of size k from that set , if the sampl is order and sampl is with replac , then there ar n to the power k differ wai we can gener such a sampl .
if sampl is without replac , then there ar n to the k fall wai of gener such a sampl .
and if on is interest in a subpopul , then there ar exactli n choos k wai of engend such a subpopul .
tableau two , part two , basic properti of binomi coeffici .
now , you might have wonder when you saw our definit of binomi coeffici , that thi wasn't quit the form that you saw it in high school .
it is us for such an elementari , and import object to look at it from sever differ vantag point , and to discov structur and properti .
so thi is what our tableau is go to be about .
so we begin with an altern form for the fall factori .
the motiv here is that a fall factori is a kei compon in the definit of the binomi coeffici .
and therefor , it behoov us to look at it a littl bit more carefulli to understand it mathemat structur .
accordingli , let's begin with n to the k fall .
recal that thi stand for the number of distinct order sampl of size k that we can engend from an underli popul of size n when the sampl is without replac .
now , by definit , thi give you a product of k success tab start at n .
each term on less than the previou on .
excel .
we call thi the fall factori .
now , it look like a factori , but of cours it is not quit a factori .
so , what if we go ahead and complet the miss term ?
now the term that ar miss ar the express n minu k , n minu k minu <num> , n minu k minu <num> , and so forth , all the wai down to <num> and <num> .
if you multipli all of these in the numer , we will get a bonafid factori .
but we can't simpli multipli number , can we ?
we're go to have to properli normal by divid by the same quantiti , to keep our ident honest .
so let's write down the next step .
we simpli put in all the term that ar miss from <num> till n minu k , in the numer and in the denomin .
paus for a bit and write it down .
rememb , learn mathemat is an intrins tactil endeavor .
you write , you think , you paus , you think again .
write , think , read , in the word of alain tourain .
now , when you're readi , restart the lectur .
now , as you progress , what do you sai ?
well , in the numer , we've got a factori .
we got all the term from <num> till n .
of cours , that give us n factori .
in the denomin , we have all the term from <num> through n minu k .
we have n minu k factori .
and now , we've discov an ident .
n to the k fall is noth more than n factori divid by n minu k factori .
excel .
let us quickli test our understand .
evalu , express n to the n minu k fall in term of factori .
paus the lectur , see if you can work it through .
restart when you ar readi .
okai .
now , we're back .
n to the n minu k fall is a fall factori .
and therefor , if in the previou express we replac k by n minu k , we will get an ident .
all thi is easi , let's go ahead and do thi .
n to the n minu k fall , then is n factori ?
and in the denomin , you subtract n minu k from n and take it factori .
or in other word , you get n factori over k factori .
excel .
now , we got , come into a right understand of what exactli thi fall factori is , and where the factori come into plai .
now , let's leverag thi understand and move on to the binomi coeffici .
hello .
i'm santosh venkatesh of the univers of pennsylvania , and you ar about to enter the strang and wonder world of probabl , the theori of chanc , it histor context and it applic in the modern world .
befor we begin in right earnest , it will be good to provid a preambl , a prelud to a theori , in which i sketch out for you some of the background , some of the motiv behind the develop of the theori .
the requisit background for a student to be abl to draw someth from these lectur .
a brief view of the organ of these lectur .
and final , a veri , veri brief word on the learn and studi of the scienc of mathemat .
so , without further ado , let me begin by talk about the flower of a mathemat scienc of probabl .
now it is veri rare in human histori that a subject abruptli unfold at a particular point in time .
it is usual a gradual accret of idea and movement , which result , ultim , in a subject develop .
and , so it is , with the theori of chanc .
the subject itself is of some antiqu .
and there have been variou point in time where develop have been made .
but a kei develop occur in the earli part of the 19th centuri , with the public in <num> of the epoch volum of pierr simon , marqui de laplac .
the analyt theori of probabl .
laplac wa the foremost mathemat physicist of hi time .
but in the earli part of the 19th centuri , he had turn hi attent to chanc and it manifest in the world around him .
you should bear in mind the context of that time .
it wa a centuri of turmoil .
thi wa the immedi aftermath of the french revolut .
societi wa undergo great chang , and so wa scienc .
deep foundat discoveri were be made at the veri heart of mathemat .
and applic of these were be seen in societi around us .
laplac opin that understand a theori of chanc wa go to be the kei and central endeavor of scienc in the ensu centuri .
and he wa right in mani wai .
we shall see as we go along on of the problem that exercis laplac's imagin .
but for the time be , let us move forward a centuri .
the evid of chanc around us that laplac had seen and had cogit on had becom even more evid in the 20th centuri .
a littl more than a centuri after laplac wrote those word , bertrand russel , the english mathematician , philosoph , and logician , in a famou lectur in <num> , echo what laplac had said .
that in the 20th centuri , the concept of chanc , the theori of chanc wa go to be the most import endeavor face scienc .
and he end up with a wry comment echo the understand of that time , that while chanc wa wild in the world around , and while there were all kind of calcul be done on the theori of chanc , it wa not clear from a mathemat point of view what exactli thi mathemat object wa .
you can imagin a mathematician wryli snigger behind hi hand , sai , well , these peopl do probabl calcul ar all veri well ; thei ar all veri nice peopl .
but realli , thi is hardli mathemat , is it ?
now , thi wa go to be veri shortli resolv just four short year later .
the russian mathematician , andrei kolmogorov set about put in place a formal mathemat framework for thi inchoat theori , which had been burgeon and , and develop over the centuri , and he wa success .
out of hi work came a fulli formal understand of a mathemat theori of chanc .
and from thi point on , the theori of probabl wa an affirm mathemat foundat .
thi is a theori which will exercis our imagin , will occupi us for the next eight week .
now a cautionari word , when histor a mathemat theori develop , there is a tendenc toward abstract .
and of cours , the idea behind abstract is to captur kei and essenti featur of a problem , without obfusc it with a lot of irrelev detail .
but there is a danger in unbridl abstract .
in such instanc , a theori run the risk of becom so esoter , so special , that onli a veri small group of highli train specialist can then gain entri into the canon .
in such case , mathemat theori tend to occupi nich , which ar occupi by a few specialist who deal with that subject .
it is when a mathemat theori hew closer to physic realiti that it see it larger success , that it exercis the mind and imagin of peopl at larg .
and kolmogorov wa quit awar of thi , as you see in the last sentenc that i have quot for you .
much of hi motiv aros from concret physic problem where chanc wa wild .
and in , as the 20th centuri progress into the 21st centuri , in thi the mathemat theori of chanc ha been wildli success .
there ar few mathemat theori where theori interplai with ribald applic so beautifulli , so wonderfulli .
theori appli , applic inform theori .
and thi interplai make both the richer .
thi theori and it rich applic ar the subject of these lectur .
all right .
now that we have a right understand of the fall factori in term of ordinari factori , let us turn to the binomi .
now , let us begin with a ratio .
look at the ratio of n factori to k factori of n minu k factori .
let's begin by group term , pull out the term k factori in the denomin and expand out to see what we get .
now the moment we pull out k factori from the denomin , what remain we recogn is exactli our old friend , n to the k fall .
and therefor , their express in the middl is exactli n to the k fall over k factori .
but we paus , we reflect and sai , we have seen thi befor .
in fact , thi is exactli the binomi coeffici , n choos k .
and so we've discov a new represent for n choos k .
n choos k mai also be written in a equal formul , as the ratio of n factori to the product of k factori and n minu k factori .
but we shouldn't rest on our .
the form in the middl , such as anoth decomposit .
what if we pull out the term in minu k factori ?
and now let's see what happen as our expans move to your right .
if you pull out the term , n minu k factori in the denomin .
what remain is n factori over k factori .
and we recogn from the previou slide , that thi is just anoth name for n to the n minu k fall .
and so thi express becom n to the n minu k fall divid by n minu k factori .
and we recogn in here and neither binomi coeffici .
it is exactli n choos n minu k .
and we've discov a beauti binomi ident .
n choos k mai be a return in term of fall factori .
if it wa written in term of ratio of factori , it mai be written in term of quit anoth binomi coeffici .
now thi kind of ident and thi abil to move freeli between differ represent turn out to be form an analyt point of view extraordinarili us .
now , we deriv these formul by just algebra manipul .
where doe thi actual lead to ?
can we think of thi in a more , oh , visual wai ?
is such an ident transpar ?
is it obviou ?
doe it fall into a laps , if we just look at the problem holist ?
inde , it doe .
incombinatori set , it is frequent the case that algebra comput .
mai be replac by pure combinatori logic argument .
let us illustr thi in thi set .
so let's start with our binomi ident , n choos k equal to n choos n minu k .
now recal that the binomi coeffici aros .
in categor the number of differ sub popul , we can engend by sampl from a larger popul .
so imagin that we've got a popul of size n .
we select k from thi popul .
thi is what you will see on your left hand side .
we've select k out of these popul of size n .
there ar n choos k wai of do thi .
now the moment you specifi k , that mean you've left out n minu k member of the popul .
specifi those that ar select is equival to specifi those that ar not select .
and therefor , it becom obviou that in fact n choos k must be exactli n choos n minu k .
here's a pure combinatori argument for thi kind of ident .
now that we have come to an understand of ident involv binomi coeffici , it's time to examin them a littl more close to see if there's some more structur in them that we can extract .
and the wai we'll do it , and the most natur wai to do thi , is to look at the binomi coeffici start from simpl case .
in thi we echo the aphor , the prescript of the hungarian mathematician georg polya , who encourag us to look at the simplest version of problem that we don't understand , and try to grappl with them first .
on the premis , of cours , that by understand simpl version of problem , more deeper , more complex structur will start becom appar , as we discov pattern .
so accordingli , let's start write binomi coeffici down start at small valu of n and small valu of k , and build up .
now , if we do thi , we can veri quickli engend a triangl of coeffici .
thi is actual call a pascal's pyramid , or pascal's triangl , after the mathemat physicist and philosoph blais pascal , who examin these coeffici oh , around the middl of the 17th centuri .
so , imagin now we have got a pyramid balanc on it apex , and the wai we ar go to think about thi is as follow , n , the size of the popul , is go to increas upward , k is go to run from left to right , between the valu <num> , <num> , through up till n .
so let's start at the bottom .
if n is <num> , k ha got onli on possibl valu , so we have <num> choos <num> .
if n is <num> , the first non trivial case , then k can be either <num> or <num> .
we arrang them , as <num> choos <num> , and <num> choos <num> abov <num> choos <num> .
then we go to n equal to <num> .
and when n is <num> , can take , k can take on of three valu , <num> , <num> , or <num> .
we have three possibl for the binomi coeffici .
we write them down in a row .
and then , n equal to <num> , n equal to <num> , and we form thi triangl .
now , the moment you write someth like thi down , well it's grace , you can see a nice littl triangl emerg .
that's pretti .
but it doesn't realli sing to us , doe it ?
to get a littl bit more , we should toss in some numer valu .
so let's evalu these binomi coeffici .
i'll leav you to verifi that the number i'm go to show you were in fact , accur , that we've been honest about it .
but spend a littl time , it'll be good exercis , and come up with at least some of the number at the lower part of the triangl .
when you ar readi , proce , and when you do , here is what we discov .
the number in red , which appear atop the binomi coeffici , ar what thei numer evalu to .
now , the binomi coeffici have given us a pyramid , or a triangl of number .
well , we should look at them .
do we discern ani pattern ?
doe anyth leap out at us ?
paus the lectur while you look at your pyramid .
stare at it , look at it upsid down , swivel around , have a drink , come back , and look at it again .
and see if you can discern ani kind of pattern in thi structur .
well , now that you're back , let's take a look at , for exampl , the binomi coeffici <num> choos <num> around the middl of your pyramid .
and the moment you look at that , you discern , and us your littl featur .
<num> choos <num> is <num> .
<num> is equal to <num> plu <num> .
but those ar exactli the valu of the binomi coeffici , beneath <num> choos <num> , at the base of a triangl .
<num> choos <num> plu <num> choos <num> , is exactli <num> choos <num> .
there's a triangl of opportun here .
and the moment you see someth like thi you realiz there ar triangl everywher .
and here ar exampl of triangl .
oh , thi is love .
we're actual see pattern evolv in front of our ey .
these triangl appear to be pervas , in fact , everi binomi coeffici appear to be equal to the sum of the two binomi coeffici at it base .
we ar on our wai to discov a gener formula .
n choos k is n minu <num> choos k plu n minu <num> choos k minu <num> .
okai , now of cours , we discov thi formula by examin special case .
but we shouldn't rest on our laurel quit so easili .
these were special case for the row i've shown you .
how do we know that thi formula is true in gener ?
for thi we're go to have to do a littl bit of a work .
but it is a truism in mathemat , but valuabl nonetheless , that it is alwai advis in a mathemat endeavor to start with the answer whenev it is humanli possibl .
in thi case , we've discov a put answer ; now we can go about verifi it .
and let's do thi .
and our procedur is go to be veri straightforward .
we're go to simpli write down the algebra definit of these binomi coeffici , and then massag the algebra , and see if we get an ident .
let's go forward .
so to verifi pascal , pascal's triangl , we're go to start with the right hand side .
n minu <num> choos k minu <num> , and n minu <num> choos k , write them down .
as alwai take your time , write down the express .
paus the lectur while you're write it down .
and restart when you're readi .
now , onc you write down these definit of these binomi coeffici , what have we got ?
well , we've got fall factori divid by factori .
the term , the fraction , clearli overlap , and so we ought to take out term that ar common in thi , in those two .
so here's the next step .
make the denomin of the first fraction , k factori by multipli by k .
and extract the last term , the follow factori , in n minu <num> to the k fall , fall for the second fraction .
and now we've got a new express .
again , you write it down , ponder it , make sure that it is honestli , algebra and proper .
now , when you come back , we've got two express .
and now , the common factor ar manifest and clear .
let's pull out the term , n minu <num> to the k minu <num> , fall , divid by k factori from both term of the express .
and when you do that , we ar left with elementari algebra .
consolid term in the squar bracket .
verifi that what you get is exactli , n minu <num> to the k minu <num> fall over k factori time n .
in other word , you've start at n minu <num> , you've got k minu <num> term go forward , each on less than the other .
and now , you're go to append a term n to the left .
and that give you exactli , n to the k fall over k factori .
but of cours , that is exactli the definit of a binomi coeffici , n choos k .
we have verifi pascal's triangl by pure algebra method .
now , as i've told you earlier , in combinatori set like thi , it is frequent possibl to directli intuit a logic combinatori argument issu all algebra .
can you see a combinatori argument , which can directli get you to the ident , without do ani algebra ?
here's a clue .
suppos you consid a popul of n minu <num> individu .
and now , suppos you add on more individu to the popul , that's the nth individu .
from the popul as a whole , suppos we ar go to draw a subsampl , a subpopul of k member .
now , you know , of cours , there ar n choos k wai of do thi .
now , of the kei individu you pick , each such subpopul is in on of two type , either the last individu is includ among your collect of k individu , or he is not .
if he is not includ , then from the origin popul of n minu <num> individu , you must select k .
there ar n minu <num> choos k wai of do thi .
if he is includ , then from the origin popul of n minu <num> indi , individu you must specifi k minu <num> .
and there ar n minu <num> choos k minu <num> wai of do thi .
and we've directli verifi pascal's triangl by a pure combinatori logic argument without the necess for ani algebra whatsoev .
but of cours , it is alwai comfort to have a firm algebra verif to be abl to put in our back pocket , so we know we ar on solid ground .
we know we have not overcount .
we know we have not undercount .
now , the wai to view pascal's triangl is to think of thi as a defin characterist of the binomi coeffici .
you will find as you go forward that thi ident is enorm us in simplifi calcul involv these coeffici .
now let's see if we can extract some more inform about the util of these coeffici and where thei come into plai .
now we go to go back in time to an ident which ha been known to practic everi on of the major ancient civil .
thi is the binomi theorem .
so let's start with two number , p and q .
we will sum them and we ar go to rais them to a power .
so p plu q to the power of <num> is by definit <num> .
anyth to the power of <num> is <num> .
p plu q to the power <num> of cours is just trite , it's just p plu q .
p plu q to the power of <num> is the first non trivial case .
and thi is the first major algebra ident you saw in elementari school .
p plu q the whole squar is p squar plu twice pq plu q squar .
veri familiar .
veri comfort .
what about p plu q the whole cube ?
now thi perhap is a littl less familiar in your memori bank , but if you scratch around long enough , you've realiz , oh ye , it is p cube plu 3p squar q plu 3pq squar plu q cube .
and if you ar persist enough , you could .
resurrect the ident for p plu q to the power of <num> .
that you might have seen onc or twice in your earli school year .
all right .
thi is nice .
we're begin to see that the expans of p plu q to a power is someth like a polynomi .
in term of power of p and q .
can we come up with a gener , abstract statement for what a power of a sum is go to look like ?
thi , of cours , is the content of the binomi theorem .
thi wa known in antiqu and .
the binomi theorem at it heart turn out to be the kei element in newton's discoveri of the calculu .
so thi is a veri power and import histor result involv the , the binomi coeffici .
now the observ ar follow .
we can write <num> as .
<num> choos <num> , which by definit you recal is <num> .
time p to the power <num> .
time q to the power <num> .
p plu q to the power <num> is p plu q .
and we can write that as a sum of two binomi term .
on involv <num> choos <num> .
on involv <num> choos <num> .
as you can verifi by just plug into the formula .
p plu q to the power <num> .
now that's given by anoth binomi expans .
<num> choos <num> time p to the power <num> , time q to the power <num> .
plu <num> choos <num> time p to the power <num> , time q to the power <num> .
plu <num> choos .
<num> time p to the power <num> time q to the power <num> .
and you could do someth similar for each of the expans on the screen .
and now a gener pattern's becom visibl and thi is a quantit of the binomi theorem .
the nth power of a sum p plu q can be written as an expans involv the binomi coeffici , start with n choos n , and run all the wai down to n choos <num> .
to each binomi coeffici you'll attach a power of p and a power of q .
and the kei properti is that the power of p , and the power of q , must add to n .
and so you have an expans , start with p to the power n , and end up at q to the power n .
thi is the binomi theorem of antiqu .
and it continu to be deepli relev and import in analysi in the modern dai .
okai , now at thi point , we have examin the binomi coeffici from mani differ direct .
we've extract kei ident , which allow us to write binomi coeffici in term of differ formul .
we discov two fundament properti , pascal's triangl and the binomi theorem .
it is now time to test your understand of these concept .
so let me give you now three problem , each of which involv the us of the binomi theorem .
examin each of them .
see what the binomi theorem sai about each of them .
and discov three interest , fascin , combinatori ident .
paus the lectur , and when you're readi restart .
now that you're back , let's start with the first problem , <num> plu <num> to the power n .
identifi p with <num> , q with <num> in the binomi expans , in the binomi theorem .
and when you do that , you get the follow express .
a sum of binomi coeffici .
but becaus <num> plu <num> is manifestli <num> , that sum of binomi coeffici .
n choos <num> plu n choos <num> plu n choos <num> and so forth .
until n choos n , must be equal to <num> to the power n .
here's your first ident .
let's look at a second ident .
in thi case , p is <num> , q is minu <num> .
when you take power of q , you will get a minu <num> to the power time q to the power .
but neg <num> to a power is plu <num> where the power is even and minu <num> where the power is odd .
now we get an altern sum of binomi coeffici .
but thi altern sum must in fact be <num> minu <num> to the power n or <num> to the power n .
in other word , thi altern sum must be ident <num> or we've discov a new ident involv these coeffici .
on last time , it is said p is on third and q is two third , we end up with on more item todai .
you can now see how a whole tabl of ident is wait for you to discov .
just plug in suitabl valu for p and q and out come an ident .
at thi point we have now understood someth about the natur of binomi coeffici , how thei interact with each other , and their essenti properti .
let's now summar what we understand about thi issu of sampl from popul .
so , at heart , we're go to start with a finit set , a finit popul , let's sai , of n element .
we ar go to sampl from thi popul , and we're go to draw a sampl of size k .
if the sampl is an order sampl where the order matter , then if the sampl is with replac , there ar n to the k possibl .
if the sampl is without replac , then there ar n to the k fall possibl .
if the sampl constitut a subpopul of size k , a subset of size k , without order , then there ar n choos k possibl .
the binomi coeffici themselv give you variou ident and variou altern represent .
so , for exampl , n choos k mai be written altern in other form involv ratio of factori or in term of yet other binomi coeffici such as n choos n minu k .
pascal's triangl allow you to decompos binomi coeffici in term of the row in pascal's triangl .
n choos k can be decompos in term of the binomi coeffici immedi below it at the base of a triangl in term of n minu <num> choos k , and n minu <num> choos k minu <num> .
and final the binomi theorem allow you to take a sum and rais to a power and expand it in term of a polynomi involv the binomi coeffici .
now these ar the essenti properti of binomi coeffici .
if you have these under your belt , you ar good to go .
our next tableau take us directli into the realm of chanc .
and we begin by explor chanc in elementari set .
with the idea that we discov essenti featur , properti , which ar readili intuit in these elementari level and build on these featur and properti to construct a formal foundat for an abstract scienc .
a word on the background that'll be a requisit to fulli absorb these lectur .
with all it sumptuou background , histor context and narr , we will be deal fundament with a mathemat theori of chanc .
not a subject or qualit view of the subject .
and accordingli , a student will need a modicum of mathemat prepar to be abl to fulli get the most out of these lectur .
not an alarm amount to be sure .
the prepar that is requisit is approxim equal to a semest of calculu .
someth along the line of what a student might see on a , in a first year at colleg .
or perhap , in an advanc placement cours , or in an intern baccalaur program .
more concret , a student should need comfort with mathemat notat and mathemat abstract to describ concept .
a student should be familiar with the idea of variabl .
for exampl , us the ubiquit n to repres a gener natur number or an integ .
or the letter x to repres a gener real number .
we will occasion us other variant on the tea , on the theme .
for exampl , letter like i , j , k , l , m , and n can repres integ .
letter like r , s , t , u , v , w , x , y , z mai repres real number .
but of cours gener , long tradit ha condit us to think of integ as n , real number as x .
a student will need exposur to the idea of a function of a real variabl .
in euler's notat , we write these as f of x .
we think of x as an independ variabl , an abscissa , and f of x , the function take valu as an ordin .
and we ar familiar with the graph of elementari function .
a student should understand and be expos to the properti of the basic function .
linear function , quadrat , exponenti znd their simpl properti .
a student should have exposur to sequenc of real number and their limit .
and elementari seri , sum finit or countabl infinit , of real number , converg or diverg .
so , thi is the scope of the mathemat background that a student should have .
of cours , the more mathemat thei have in their background , the more mathemat matur as it were , the better .
but thi is the minimum amount you should have if you realli want to absorb these lectur as we go through .
the differenti and integr calculu make the appear in these lectur onli in select bonu materi .
which ar not essenti for the grasp of the main element that i'm go to unfold for you .
now with all thi for background , a student will also need some element that ar typic encount in high school .
and these ar denot , where thei appear in these lectur by thi particular sign , that ha appear on screen .
to denot someth where you need will work in your background .
the element you'll need ar twofold .
the elementari theori of count and the elementari theori of set .
the theori of count , we need to understand how to sampl , with and without replac , from famili , from collect .
the idea of factori and monomi coeffici .
from the naiv , or the elementari theori of set , we need to understand notat for set .
basic set oper , union , intersect , complement and set differ .
and simpl rule for massag set ident , de morgan's law .
these lectur ar avail as part of the preview .
and for a student who is unfamiliar with these idea .
or ha had these topic and thei ar sequest in the dim recess of her memori and she would like a refresh .
you will find these lectur avail as part of the preview .
a brief survei of the menu of item that you will encount in thi cours .
let me emploi a culinari metaphor .
the chef ar your teach assist and your instructor .
and we now have a repast , arriv befor us .
a here is the menu that we're go to sai , the topic of the class .
thi is a fix menu and we don't have the opportun here to , to cut and chang the element .
but there is a certain amount of flexibl as you will see .
the cours is arrang in five topic segment , start from the develop of an axiomat theori , move all the wai up to the emerg of the fabul limit law and the remark bell curv .
these topic arrang ar spread over eight week .
two week a piec for the first three topic and on week a piec for the last two .
and each topic is arrang in a seri of lectur that i will call tableaux .
so , tableaux is a coher , intellectu self contain collect of idea , a lectur , if you will .
some tableaux need more than on part .
so , you have part on and two , or sometim part on , two , and three .
and , togeth these tableaux will make up a topic .
the tableaux i'm go to present for you ar of three type .
and to carri thi culinari metaphor further forward , these tableaux ar of the type of hor d'oeuvr , littl appet .
these includ the preview lectur which have be made avail current , as well as the review lectur .
on the element of count and naiv set theori .
and then a main bodi of tableaux , which compris the meat of the cours .
these ar the element which flesh out the topic from on through five .
and as we progress through these tableaux , you will discov that some element , some segment of a tableaux , and sometim the entir tableaux ar mark with thi sign .
thi sigil stand for a danger bend , an explor of an idea or of a topic , which constitut a , let's sai a tributari from the main river of probabl .
these tributari ar fragrant , exot , sometim danger .
sampl them as time and inclin allow .
these ar bonu lectur .
you can absorb them while progress through linearli , the materi in the class .
or you could come back to them at a later time when repeat , by a chanc of occurr .
thi then is a set for the class .
let me conclud thi prelud with a word on the teach and the learn of mathemat .
a seriou student of the subject is not an idl spectat at a varieti show but learn best by activ involv .
and inde for the vast major of student , learn mathemat is a particularli tactil endeavor .
thi wa codifi by the british mathematician alan ture in a semin paper that herald the dawn of comput scienc in the year <num> .
base on hi observ of how we appar think , ture posit a model of human cogit and comput where he posit that we think and comput by read , paus , read again , paus , write , paus .
perhap retrac our step read again , paus , write , perhap eras , paus , read , and so on .
and so , to get the most out of these lectur , a student should have a pencil in hand and paper to write on .
equat aris slowli and languor on the screen .
paus the lectur while you write them down .
absorb the notat and the logic .
bear in mind that learn is not a linear process .
you mai find that you have to go back in your note to revisit a concept to figur out , well what exactli wa that again ?
think it through and when you've understood it , come back to your current place and proce .
a student might recogn the model of instruct in a classroom .
and , assuredli , in a student's background she would have had instructor who were particularli effect at deliv inform which is abstract in natur .
the mathematician herb ryser of the california institut of technolog wa well awar of these fundament in learn .
he had thi pretti littl trick of write beautifulli on the blackboard in perfect silenc and wait for the last pencil to stop move befor he utter a word .
hi student were vastli appreci .
so accordingli , paus the lectur frequent .
write down the mathemat as it aris .
feel free to go back to revisit a concept to further your understand of someth , an aha moment as it were , befor you proce .
our next lectur in thi preview will introduc chanc in veri simpl set .
and in these veri simpl set for which we have a lot of intuit , we will discov unexpect and strang fluctuat , unexpect phenomena , thing which perturb us .
thi doesn't look right .
and in the emerg of such strang behavior in veri simpl set , the necess for a theori and a principl wai of think about the subject will becom manifest .
tableau <num> , part <num> , chanc around us .
probabl is , with a possibl except of euclidean geometri , the most intuit of the mathemat scienc .
chanc add languag , pervad our common experi .
we speak of the chanc of the weather turn .
we wager on the sex of a newborn .
toss a coin at the start of a game .
we bet on a hors race .
take a chanc on the institution gambl that masquerad as state sponsor lotteri .
and of cours , game of chanc have an ancient and honor histori .
excav of bone dice in archaeolog dig in north africa show that dice wa not unknown in egypt .
both game in which player take turn base upon the role of a die , so five in the dai of the internet .
and the hors race surviv as an institut .
while the histor palett is rich and applic pervas , a fulli modern mathemat theori of chanc date onli to the last centuri .
thi theori and the rich applic it ha spawn ar the subject of these lectur .
the earli histori of probabl wa concern primarili with the calcul of numer probabl for outcom of game of chanc .
but , todai , the curiou student encount probabilist set at everi turn in divers applic .
to illustr , on , opinion poll , and what the result sai about the popul as a whole .
two , the environ .
sampl to determin the impact of an invas speci , or of pollut concentr .
three , data mine .
the predict of user prefer for movi , or book , or soap , from sporad internet us , ha becom big busi in the ag of the internet .
for mathemat financ .
identif of small margin in a search for order and predict in the chao of financi market .
five , unman navig over uncertain terrain , exemplifi by nasa's curios rover on the martian surfac .
six , mobil and satellit commun be doubl by nois and interfer .
seven , astrophys .
the discoveri of the 3k background cosmic radiat , and what it portend for the univers .
eight , particl physic .
the statist search for the higg boson and other subatom particl .
nine , biologi .
the descript of flock behavior in wild gees and fish .
ten , genet .
mendel's theori of hered , genet combin , and recombin , and mutat .
<num> , epidemiolog and the spread of infect .
<num> , actuari scienc .
the analysi of risk in the design of actuari tabl , estim of time to failur of machineri , or bridg , or airplan .
<num> , bank .
invest strategi and the probabl of ruin .
<num> , queu theori and the statist analysi of queue of telephon call at an exchang , data packet and an internet server , or car in a highwai system .
the student will be readili abl to add to the list from her common experi .
with chanc pervas around us , small wonder that we have a strong intuit feel for it .
and yet , there ar pitfal for the unwari .
follow the sage advic of the hungarian mathematician , georg polya .
we should begin with the simplest version of the problem , for which we don't alreadi know the answer .
and the simplest set involv chanc , is unquestion the toss of a coin .
tableau on .
prelud to a theori of chanc .
part two , the amaz aspect of fluctuat and the hot hand phenomenon .
in tableau on part on we look at evid of chanc around us .
chanc is ubiquit .
and natur , we have a strong and intuit feel for it .
but in the midst of the familiar lurk strang .
and as part of the introductori lectur , i want to conclud by show you unexpect deal , unexpect rippl in the fabric of chanc .
in experi with which we ar quit familiar .
so to begin , what is the simplest experi on can think of involv chanc ?
unquestion , the toss of a coin .
so , let's consid the repeat toss of a coin .
and of cours , thi give us a templat for what we view as a random sequenc .
now , we ar at the start of a semest of studi .
and perhap a littl tedium could be forgiven .
so , i'm go to ask you to do two exercis at the cost of a modicum of tedium .
natur enough , i hope that you'll be will to indulg me , becaus there is , of cours , a method in the mad .
so to begin , our simplest understand of what constitut a random sequenc assuredli come from the repeat toss of a coin .
do the follow , take a coin , toss it repeatedli <num> time and write down the sequenc of success and failur , head and tail that you observ .
to keep life simpl for yourself , write <num> for the head and <num> for the tail .
and so what you will write is a long string of <num> 1s and 0s .
do thi now .
paus the lectur and when you've complet write your sequenc , restart .
oh good , you're back .
now , here is the second part of what i'd like you to do .
as your exemplar of a random sequenc , write down the first <num> on and zero that come into your head .
don't overthink it , just write down what come natur to you as an exampl of a random sequenc , someth like <num> and so forth .
just a string of on and zero randomli gener from you .
paus the lectur while you do thi and restart when you're readi to continu .
good .
now we have two sequenc .
examin them .
do thei look similar ?
do thei share characterist ?
or do thei look rather differ microscop from each other ?
paus again , and take a look at them .
see if you can discern ani pattern or lack there of in your sequenc .
and restart the lectur when you're readi yet again .
so , now you're back .
here is an exampl of sequenc that i gener in accord with the rule i gave you .
here ar two sequenc label star and doubl star .
i gener on of them by toss thi coin <num> time .
and i gener the other by just write down a random jumbl of on and zero that came into my head .
can you tell which wa which ?
now , these sequenc ar similar to the sequenc you've written down .
on of them gener by a toss of a coin .
on of them gener from my mind .
ar thei differ ?
do thei share similar featur .
now assuredli , both of them ar purportedli repres random sequenc .
the exemplar of a random sequenc is the on gener by the toss of a coin .
is the on gener artifici similar in characterist ?
which is which ?
can i discern on from the other ?
well natur , if a sequenc is random , we feel instinct that mayb on should check to see that the success and failur ar in balanc .
ar the on and zero in balanc ?
now , if you look at the sequenc label star , you'll find that there ar <num> on and <num> zero .
the sequenc label doubl star , on the other hand , ha <num> on and <num> zero .
the on and zero , head and tail , look like thei're in balanc .
it doesn't look like there's veri much to on that score .
now , in a situat like thi it is alwai profit to see if on can draw a pictur .
so , here is a graphic view of these two sequenc .
what i've done is plot the sequenc as if thei were drawn tempor .
from left to right in time .
so , on for anywher you see a on and it drop to a zero whenev you see a zero .
and you observ , in both sequenc , a rather random jag movement between on and zero .
veri good .
now , look at the figur doe anyth stand out ?
now , when you look at these two figur , you might sai , well , the graph of the sequenc label star is jag , but it appear to have rather larg mesa and vallei , peak and dip .
now , to focu on them , here ar three , a mesa and two vallei , which seem to be quit larg .
the sequenc label doubl star , on the other hand , is jag back and forth fairli unpredict , like the first sequenc .
but doesn't seem to have a larg mesa or a larg vallei anywher .
if we hone in on these mesa and vallei , you find that in the sequenc label star you have at on place in the sequenc , seven contigu on .
seven head .
and in two other place with sequenc , a sequenc of five consecut tail .
and a sequenc of six consecut tail .
the sequenc label doubl star , on the other hand , ha no contigu sequenc of success and failur , head and tail , of length more than four .
hm , i wonder if the evid for the sequenc label star is look just a littl suspici .
do we anticip that in a string of coin toss , that we'll get repeat self same outcom ?
consid for exampl , seven toss of thi coin .
what ar the chanc of obtain seven head in a row , in seven toss ?
now , if on toss thi coin seven time , each toss ha got two possibl , a head or a tail .
and so the sequenc of seven toss ha got <num> time <num> time <num> , <num> time in all or <num> to the power <num> or <num> possibl differ sequenc of head and tail .
of those <num> distinct possibl sequenc of head and tail , the sequenc with all head is precis on of them and so the odd , in a veri natur sens , of observ <num> head in <num> toss of a coin is <num> in <num> .
less than <num> , or more precis , no more than <num> chanc in <num> , <num> .
thi look distinctli suspici , so should we anticip that in a random sequenc of <num> 1s and 0s , that somewher there's a sequenc of <num> 1s ?
or five zero .
or six zero in a row .
thi is look distinctli suspici .
to proce further , perhap then we should look at pattern where there ar success run of success and failur .
we turn to thi next .
let us try to put our understand of the phenomenon of the structur into a mathemat model on which we can do analysi .
so , what is the basic set ?
we ar toss a coin repeatedli .
sai , <num> time or <num> time .
what is it we ar look for ?
we ar look for consecut sequenc or run of success .
or head , or on's in the sequenc .
let us sai that a success run of length five is occas if somewher in that sequenc we have a run of five or more contigu head or success .
the kei here is that we're not look for a success run in the first five locat or the last five locat .
or ani five design locat .
we're interest in the occurr of a success run of at least a certain length , somewher , anywher in the given sequenc .
now , in set like thi , it is alwai wise to step back and look at the pictur from a higher vantag point .
it is alwai us to try to solv a problem more gener rather than on specif case at a time .
and accordingli thi will now necessit some mathemat notat .
so let's begin .
what ar the variabl that you could plai with in such an experi ?
first , the number of toss requir .
let us sai we ar interest in n toss of the coin .
why n , you ask .
becaus it is inconceiv that we call a gener integ anyth els .
long tradit and custom have inur us to call a gener integ or a variabl n .
so , accordingli , let n be the number of toss of interest .
what is anoth paramet of interest ?
well , the length of success run that we ar interest in .
the nomin length of interest to us is five , but more gener , let us sai we're interest in success run of length r .
so , what is a set ?
we've toss a coin n time and we ar look for a consecut sequenc of at least r head or success somewher in that sequenc .
and natur enough , we ar interest in the chanc of thi occur .
let's introduc some more notat .
we ar interest in success run , so let's call s the probabl of obtain a success run of the desir length .
now , s is parametr by two variabl .
on , it depend on the number of toss of the coin , n .
and two , it depend upon the number of success consecut that we wish to acquir .
accordingli , let's introduc a subscript n to keep track of how mani toss there were and provid the length of success run r as an argument to s .
we will sai , s sub n of r or slightli more casual , s n of r to stand for the probabl that in n toss of a coin , on observ a success run of length at least r somewher in the sequenc .
now wouldn't it be nice if you could find an explicit solut for thi problem for a gener n and an r ?
the level of sophist we ar at yet , we don't have to have enough tool in our armori to attack thi problem frontal .
what i shall do for the nonc is give you some numer valu for these probabl , for specif chosen valu n and r .
of cours , i will hope that you will be will to take thi on faith at least temporarili , while we await the build up of a background suffici to allow us to analyz thi question .
so , here is a tabl .
the tabl ha three column , as you see .
the first column allow r , the length of the success run , to run from <num> , <num> up to <num> .
the second column list the probabl of obtain a success run of the , the , of the given length r for <num> toss of the coin as r vari from <num> through <num> .
the third column give you these probabl for <num> toss of the coin .
now , scan on of these column up and down , you'll notic immedi that as the target length of success run , r , increas from two to ten , that the probabl of observ a success run of that length , decreas .
veri natur .
thi is not what is surpris .
what is surpris is how big these probabl ar for even modestli larg valu of r .
look at the fifth row of the tabl , for r is equal to <num> .
the target number of success .
the chanc of obtain a success run of length <num> , somewher in a sequenc of <num> toss of the coin , is now <num> .
there's a better than <num> in <num> chanc of obtain a success run of like <num> if you toss a coin <num> time .
go back and examin your sequenc of <num> toss of the coin .
did you observ a success run length of five or larger somewher in there ?
if you did , it should occas no surpris .
the chanc ar better than on in two that you would obtain thi .
the probabl get even more remark larg for a <num> toss .
the chanc of obtain a success run of length <num> somewher in a sequenc of <num> toss is now <num> .
thi is where intuit bubbl .
it doesn't feel right the the untrain intuit that these probabl ar as larg as thei seem to be .
now with thi , with these number as background , it should not come as a shock to a student that if we look for either a success run or a failur run , then the probabl ar go to be quit larg .
here , for exampl , the chanc of observ either a success run or a failur run , or both of length <num> in a sequenc of a <num> toss clock in at an amaz <num> .
now with thi , if our understand if we can cast at ey at the two sequenc we have , the sequenc label star look quit unexception .
we have a sequenc of five failur , a sequenc of six failur , a sequenc of seven success .
that seem quit reason in <num> toss .
the odd of observ on or other of length <num> is about more than <num> .
the sequenc label doubl star on the other hand look distinctli dodgi .
there is no sequenc of success or failur of length more than four anywher in that sequenc .
and now it will not come as a surpris to you to hear , that the sequenc label doubl star wa the on that i made up .
the sequenc label star wa what i'd obtain by toss a coin painfulli and repeatedli <num> time .
now , the fact that there ar challeng to intuit at such elementari level alreadi suggest a need to develop a formal theori .
a mathemat theori which allow us to put problem like thi on a firm basi so that we can logic analyz them and see what the result ar .
but such question ar not mere of a whimsic or a toi charact .
such elementari sound problem have import in problem of the physic world around us .
and it will be good to immedi give an exampl of how such an elementari set illumin someth which is veri common around us .
and so , without further ado , i will turn to a problem in sport psycholog .
a casual spectat at a sport event is assuredli acquaint with the phenomenon where some player on the field goe on a torrid streak where he can appar do no wrong .
in basketbal parlanc , thi is sometim call a hot hand .
to put thing in context , consid the follow set .
exhibit a , a basketbal player , a good player .
he typic make on basket out of everi two shot he take .
imagin that in a game where he take mani shot , sai <num> shot , somewher in that sequenc he score <num> basket in a row .
we sai that he ha a hot hand .
convent wisdom dictat that score five in a row for a player who typic make on in two is unusu , right ?
the chanc that if he just make <num> shot , sai the first <num> shot , the chanc thei all go in is onli <num> in <num> .
thi look veri small .
and therefor , the fact that he ha made five in a row seem to be bonafid evid that he is on a purpl patch .
he is , ha a hot hand .
he ha an alter mental state where he can do no wrong and therefor it is natur for fan and for hi teammat to try to milk that run of success as much as possibl by get the ball so that the entir run can be milk .
now , thi is so self evid , and we all bui into it , that it hardli need defens or doe it ?
here is a counter intuit possibl .
what if , on the other hand , thi streak of success for thi player is not at all unusu , but it's just to be expect from sheer chanc fluctuat .
hm .
we now have anoth possibl , almost heret , becaus it seem to run so counter to our nativ intuit .
but have put it up there , we now have two possibl .
which of these is actual correct ?
of cours , our coin toss exampl and our examin of streak of success , success run , point the connect to the coin toss problem .
and thi enabl , enabl us to put in place a principl statist test of a hypothesi .
what doe a test compris ?
veri , veri simpl .
imagin that a player ha taken <num> shot and he's got a particular sequenc of success and failur in make basket .
the test involv compar the statist properti of that sequenc with what on would get if on toss a coin <num> time .
thi is an exampl of what is call in german a gedankenexperi , a thought experi .
i don't actual have to toss a coin <num> time , but i could certainli conceiv of it .
imagin that on were to toss a coin <num> time , would the sequenc of head and tail , success or failur that we obtain , look statist differ from what we observ for the player on the court ?
and now of cours , the surpris result that i had put befor you suggest that there is a test we can make , by comparison , and that the test might have an unexpect result .
now , thi is a polit ag , and a polit ag demand a slogan .
so let me promptli give you a slogan .
and here it is .
the more like it is that in a string of coin toss we observ a success on of the length that we see on the court , the less there is evid for a mysteri , other worldli hot hand .
let me rephras thi .
after all , if in a string of coin toss it is not at all unlik that we observ five head in a row somewher .
then why should we , becaus we observ five success in a row on the basketbal court , ascrib to it anyth unusu , otherworldli , magic .
well , such phenomena ar readili explic by just natur , random coin toss fluctuat .
and inde , the tabl i've given you give us immedi evid .
and thi time , against our basic hypothesi .
imagin that the coin wa toss <num> time .
we ar look for a success run of length five .
the odd of thi , as we see in the tabl , ar <num> .
if on toss a coin <num> time , then <num> of the time we'll observ success run of length <num> or more somewher .
it is not at all surpris , therefor , that a player who make <num> and <num> basket will in a string of <num> attempt , somewher make a string of <num> in a row .
now , thi suggest that there is no evid for the hot hand for the particular exampl i have contriv .
but thi wa a start point for an extens and deep statist investig by a team of three statistician , gilovich at harvard univers , and vallon and tverski at stanford univers .
and thei publish the result of their studi in <num> .
thei had examin an entir season's work of player fs in the nation basketbal associ , and thi wa the conclus .
base on capit statist analysi of all that data , thei conclud that the hot hand theori is a widespread cognit illus affect all behold , player , and coach alik .
in other word , there wa no statist evid at all in favor of a mysteri hot hand .
everyth that wa observ could be explic just by natur , random fluctuat .
a postscript to the stori .
it's amus in it own right , but a post script here as report by daniel kahneman in hi wonder book of <num> , think fast and slow .
and kahneman report that , perhap apocryph , a report for the boston globe took the result of thi paper and went to the redoubt coach of the boston celtic , red aurbach and said , hei red , thi gui at harvard sai that there is no , noth at all in thi idea of a hot hand , it is all explic by chanc .
to which , the famous eras red auerbach appar grunt , so some gui did a studi .
what do i care ?
of cours , we do care .
as the probabilist william fellow ha remark , even strong faith must be subject to a statist test .
and our question then is , how do we put such princip test togeth so that we can come up with logic conclus ?
thi , in essenc , is the heart of our cours .
tableau three , chanc in commonplac set .
part on , random sampl from finit set , ball and urn .
we ar now about to begin our journei in build a formal theori of chanc .
in such circumst , these ar the cardin error to strive for overli complex gener set in which we want to build up intuit .
we should alwai try to start with simpl set for which we have intuit and try to extract kei principl , which we can then quantifi as a basi of a formal theori .
the set is much like what went on in euclidean geometri .
practition began with an understand .
subject to be sure of geometri concept , the idea of straight line , parallel line , arc .
and eventu , on manag to abstract awai the kei idea and put togeth an axiomat structur .
a mathemat conceit , a model of realiti where the trim , which were superflu to the logic content were elimin and the essenc extract .
of cours , the true worth of such model is that thi lead eventu to outcom , which can be predict and test and the ultim wear out of such model isn't a fit of these predict to observ realiti .
our develop of the basic principl of chanc will follow similar guidelin and natur we will start with set with which we have immedi familiar .
dice , card , coin and such like .
so thi is the set .
eventu of cours , we will want to move on from simpl exampl and look at set , which ar more nuanc and subtl .
and we will come back to these as the cours progress .
the idea of bose and einstein have had a decid impact .
and thei come into plai in commonplac set .
everyon todai is familiar with the laser pointer .
the green laser pointer which is us for present , but also is on evid in for exampl soccer match , where oh , less reput member of the audienc point light at player on the , on the field , to distract them .
here's a veri commonplac idea .
the idea of a laser .
the exist of lase abil is due to the fact that photon follow those einstein statist .
thei're ident particl which ar non interact , and mani of them can land coher in the same beam , and form for exampl , a coher beam of light , a laser .
on also find thi at plai in more exot circumst .
for exampl , bose einstein condens have a particular import role to plai in thi phenomenon call superfluid , and also in superconduct .
though , of cours , in the interest of full disclosur , the idea have to be adapt .
becaus in those set , the particl actual do interact , and so on need to massag the basic understand here .
but with all these success , as earli as <num> , it wa clear that we still had difficulti explain thing at the level of electron fluctuat .
for exampl , the bose einstein statist don't explain why the specif heat of electron in a metal at room temperatur is what it is .
the classic theori predict that on should need a lot fewer electron in the current for the observ specif heat than on actual get .
thi is strang , and of cours , when on get data that ar not in conson with the theori , that suggest that on ha to revisit the theori .
the same kind of puzzl phenomenon aris when on look at emiss current at room temperatur .
and again there ar gap between what the theori sai and what we actual observ in practic .
in <num> , a coupl of year after bose and einstein publish their paper , enrico fermi and paul dirac , two more giant of 20th centuri physic , propos a new model to handl thing like electron fluctuat .
fermi is famou through , for exampl , the fermi lab , which now sadli is defunct .
paul dirac wa a brilliant british physicist and mathematician .
thei want to explain these phenomena , thing like , why do electron appar not subscrib to the bose einstein model ?
and so thei need a kei insight .
now , what wa their kei insight ?
again , the set is , we have a random placement of n ball into r urn .
the ball , of cours , ar your particl , whatev flavor thei ar .
the urn repres physic state of be of these particl .
follow the insight of bose and einstein , fermi and dirac sai , well , we ar go to consid these particl as if thei were indistinguish ball .
but we need someth more , and thi is what thei happen upon .
what if the ball were exclus , snobbish ?
what if each ball refus to share an urn with a neighbor ?
in other word , we ar constrain to have occup which could onli be zero or on .
no urn's occup could two or more .
thi principl that urn could be at most singli occupi is call the pauli exclus principl , name after wolfgang pauli .
so now we have a new model .
we have n indistinguish ball , r urn .
and the addit pauli exclus princip as a constraint .
no urn can contain more than on ball .
think of thi as a veri exclus neighborhood .
each ball want it own hous , and it want nobodi els live with it .
now , some thing ar immedi clear .
if each ball ha it own urn , then the number of ball cannot exce the number of urn .
in theoret comput scienc , thi is sometim call the pigeonhol principl .
you have a certain number of pigeon , the ball , a certain number of hole , the urn .
and if everi pigeon is to get it own hole , then the number of pigeon cannot exce the number of hole .
okai , so immedi , we know that n cannot exce r .
okai .
in addit , we know that occup configur here , k1 , k2 , through kr , ar string of zero and on onli , becaus no occup number can exce on .
it can onli be a zero or a on .
of cours , then we conclud that the k1 through kr's ar either zero or on .
and thei must of cours to add up to n .
all of the ball ar account for somewher in the urn system .
now , let's take a look at a pictur .
and again , follow pauli's sage advic , let's look at a simpl model .
two indistinguish ball , four urn .
how can we distribut them in accord with pauli's exclus principl ?
well , here's an exampl .
let's sai urn <num> and urn <num> contain on ball a piec .
thi of cours give you an occup configur , zero , on , zero , on .
now , let's tear at thi pictur for a littl bit .
a gener pictur is go to look like thi .
now , what doe that mean ?
it mean that there ar r locat , in thi case , four locat , four urn , and the moment you specifi a ball ha gone into an urn , then that urn cannot be reus .
in other word , the placement of ball into urn is a select methodolog which select which urn ar occupi .
in thi case , of cours , there ar exactli four choos two wai of specifi the two occupi urn , and of cours thi is six .
and of cours , we immedi gener .
if we have a set where you have n indistinguish ball , r urn , ball ar distribut into the urn in such a wai that no two , no urn contain more than on ball .
then thi is equival to specifi which n of the r urn ar occupi .
and of cours , there ar exactli r choos n wai of do thi .
now we've come to a right understand of what the pauli exclus principl constrain us .
we onli have r choos n distinguish configur .
distinguish occup number .
now , onc you have these , again , there is no a priori reason to believ that on particular configur is ani more like than anoth .
and therefor , we assum that all these configur ar equal like .
now , what then is a chanc of on particular occup configur aris ?
well , it is the reciproc of thi number .
and so we now have the fermi dirac statist .
the probabl that if n indistinguish particl ar launch into r urn while satisfi the pauli exclus principl , the probabl of observ on particular occup configur is the reciproc of r choos n .
bear in mind that the occup configur we ar talk about here must correspond to occup which ar either zero or on , and of cours , the sum must be exactli n .
all the particl must be account for .
okai , thi is all well and good .
but of cours , the true test of such a theori is whether it is valid in practic .
and on find in the 20th centuri a triumphant vindic of thi idea .
a whole class of particl , call fermion in honor of enrico fermi , fall into thi bin .
from a physicist's point of view , these ar particl which have on half of an integ in spin .
thei have half integ spin .
exampl ar electron , proton , neutron .
these all ar elementari particl .
an electron , for exampl , is a spin on half particl .
and of all of these have been shown to follow these statist .
more complex particl also fall into thi bin .
for exampl , the helium <num> atom .
or the carbon <num> atom .
thi then give us a satisfactori pictur of a separ class of particl .
of cours , on understand that these ar elementari model , and while thei illumin the big pictur , there is much more there .
okai , and of cours , to understand the real statist physic , on ha to figur out how these particl interact with each other .
how the boson flow to the fermion , and vice versa .
of cours , then thi give us the rich edific which is the modern dai statist theori of the atom .
but for our purpos alreadi these elementari idea , and thi is the take awai messag .
simpl ball and urn model , variat on that theme alreadi , alreadi elucid , illumin kei fundament principl of modern physic .
let us conclud and pull these string togeth .
so , in summari , small variat on the theme of ball and urn ar potent in understand how particl in statist physic behav .
the classic theori , due to boltzmann and maxwel , treat particl as if thei were distinguish .
what els ?
it's so complet natur .
there's onli on thing wrong with it .
it doesn't fit the realiti at the particul level .
the more refin statist , due to bose and einstein , describ thi class of particl call boson .
and these particl ar model as if thei were indistinguish but non interact .
and thei occupi urn , but there's no constraint on how mani particl can occupi an urn .
and these lead to the bose einstein statist .
anoth class of particl , the fermion , the particl with half integ spin , these ar model in distinguish ball , with the addit constraint that the particl obei the poli exclus principl .
no two particl can be in the same state , can be in the same urn .
and , a huge mass of , of natur is explain by thi class of particl .
all the particl that ar known to natur so far fall into either the boson or the fermion categori .
but of cours thi need not be the end of the stori , as more and more exot particl ar discov , as richer and wilder behavior is discov , we might need , we might find evid , the need for a new theori .
still anoth model of realiti , but that will have to wait upon the event .
in thi part of the tableau , we have articul how we can start with a veri basic ball and urn model which aris in common place set and appli it in a rather sophist set , that of statist physic .
and extract beauti keen sight .
we now go back to the main thread .
our understand of how commonplac problem lead ultim to a formal of the basic tenet of a formal theori of probabl .
so we shall pick up the thread , the skein again in part three of tableau three , come up next .
tableau <num> , part <num> , beyond ball and urn , unequ probabl and infinit space .
so , in our earlier tableau , we look at chanc in commonplac combinatori set .
where the metaphor of a ball and urn wa appropri and led to pure combinatori wai of evalu chanc and comput probabl .
we will now want to move on to a set where chanc is at plai but outcom ar not equal like .
let me immedi begin by give you an exampl from the popular lexicon .
thi is in the game of crap .
now , a game of crap is plai by throw a pair of dice repeatedli , and sum the face valu .
the question here is what is the chanc that you win on the veri first throw in crap ?
so let's walk into the game .
so if you walk into a casino , and you see a , a game of crap go , thi is roughli how you'll find it be plai .
the game proce as i've told you but repeat throw of a pair of dice .
at each throw , you sum the face valu of the dice .
and depend on what the sum is , you have on of three possibl .
you either win , or you lose .
or the game continu by further throw of the pair of dice .
now we ar go to look at the simplest version of the game .
if in the first throw of the pair of dice , you happen to roll a seven or an eleven , then you win immedi .
if you ar unlucki enough to draw <num> or <num> , or <num> , then you lose immedi .
if the sum of the face valu is <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> , then you continu plai by repeatedli roll the pair of dice , sum their face valu of each time .
stop at the first instant where you either replic your origin throw <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> , or you have the misfortun of throw a <num> .
if you replic your origin thrown on the conclud throw , you win .
if you happen to throw a seven on the conclud throw , you lose .
now let's look at the first part of the game where you look at on throw and you ask what is the chanc i win ?
what is a proper model for thi experi ?
now , befor we launch into an analysi , we should come up with a wai of describ mathemat what is go on .
what ar the outcom of thi thought experi ?
well you realiz that if you throw a pair of dice , then the smallest of the face valu is on , and therefor the sum of face valu is go to have to be at least two .
on the other hand , the largest of the face valu of the die is <num> , and so the sum of the face valu cannot exce <num> .
and so it becom appar that in thi thought experi , for on throw of a pair of dice where you sum the face valu , the outcom ar the number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and <num> .
what is the measur of chanc we should ascrib to these basic possibl ?
now let's decompos the game down a littl bit further .
so , the possibl outcom of the experi , as far as chanc and crap is concern , ar the number <num> through <num> .
but you can aris at these number in a myriad of wai .
let's visual take a look at how we could do thi .
the result when you throw a pair of dice is go to be a pair of number , on for each die .
die on and die two .
we can as befor , arrang these in a <num> by <num> grid of possibl .
now , which of these possibl trigger the valu <num> ?
now , naiv , we might have thought , befor we did ani analysi , that well , there ar <num> possibl , <num> through <num> , and thei should all then be equal like .
each should have a <num> in <num> chanc of aris .
but just a littl thought show that , that is not veri right .
that our logic wa miss wai of partit the problem and that certain number have much richer partit than other .
for exampl , to get to a sum of <num> , there's onli on wai of do thi .
each die will have to show a face of on .
well , how about <num> ?
now , at thi case , you have two possibl .
the first die could show two , and the second die could show on , or on and two .
what about <num> ?
now there ar here possibl and now you're begin to see a pattern .
it's go across a diagon on a <num> dimension grid .
<num> ha got <num> possibl .
<num> ha got five possibl .
and <num> ha <num> possibl .
and now we hit diminish return .
at <num> , the number of possibl is smaller .
it's <num> , for <num> you have <num> possibl .
for <num> , you have <num> possibl .
for <num> , <num> possibl .
and final , for <num> , the onli wai to configur a <num> is if you roll a <num> for each of the dice .
and now thi immedi give us an idea of what the natur chanc mechan that should be ascrib as .
so it begin with a set of <num> possibl for a chanc experi , thei ar arriv at by variou combin for a pair of dice .
and sinc there is no reason to expect ani on combin with a pair of dice to be ani differ from the other , we ascrib to all possibl pair combin the same chanc of <num> in <num> .
and therefor , a natur ascrib of chanc in thi experi , is to assign to <num> the chanc of <num> in <num> .
to assign to <num> the chanc of <num> in <num> .
to <num> , the chanc of <num> in <num> , and so on .
to <num> , the chanc of <num> in <num> .
and now the number start decreas .
<num> ha got a chanc of <num> and <num> , <num> of <num> in <num> , and final , <num> ha a chanc of <num> in <num> .
from a model point of view , thi is equival to consid a situat where you had an <num> side die .
with the number <num> through <num> inscrib on the variou face , but the die is load .
<num> and <num> ar unlik to occur .
thei occur onli on thirti sixth of the time .
if you do the experi <num> time by roll thi load die <num> time , you'd expect to see a <num> , onli on averag , about onc in those <num> tri .
<num> is the most heavili load outcom for thi <num> side die , it occur <num> in <num> time , or onc everi <num> roll .
we now have an understand of a chanc experi with a finit number of outcom , <num> outcom in all .
the number <num> through <num> .
but these outcom ar not equal like and it is clear now from thi set why thei should not be equal like .
we have identifi event in the set .
the event that i have succinctli label win , stand for the concept of win on the first throw at crap .
but thi we identifi veri complet by the pair of element , the aggreg of element <num> and <num> .
you win if you happen to throw a <num> or <num> on the first throw .
the event lose , we identifi with an aggreg of three element to <num> or <num> .
and a third event , which is that you continu after the first thrown crap , if you throw ani on of the aggreg of six element <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> .
a next step in a program is natur enough to ask how should we assign chanc to these event ?
and now , we're go to touch upon a central principl , not just in probabl but in all of mathemat .
the huge import principl of addit .
thi principl captur the idea that is implicit .
that the whole is alwai the sum of it part .
at it heart , addit is a guid principl which suggest that if a problem is partit into piec , we can assembl the whole by simpli put togeth and ad up the individu piec .
sound banal .
sound trite .
you look at me and sai like duh .
but , thi principl you'll sai is incred nuanc , incred subtl .
and the engin which fuel some of the most delic and sophist analys in the subject .
now let's put thi understand of addit to work in thi veri simpl set .
to win on the first throw at crap , the event i have succinctli just call win , mean that i throw a <num> or an <num> .
in other word , you decompos a partit , the idea , the event of a win into either a <num> be thrown , or an <num> be thrown .
and therefor , the principl of addit sai , to the event call win , i ascrib a chanc , in notat , p of win .
which is obtain by ad up the probabl of throw a <num> or an <num> .
veri simpl , veri deep , and here is a guid principl of addit .
so the probabl , we see by just look at a tabl , the probabl of win on the first roll of crap is <num> and <num> .
what about the probabl of lose in the first throw of crap ?
appeal to addit again , we look at the event lose as correspond to throw a <num> , or a <num> , or a <num> .
the probabl of lose , therefor , is a sum of the chanc probabl for each of these object .
and look at our tabl again , we see that it evalu to <num> and <num> .
paus the lectur for a moment while you work through and verifi the simpl calcul .
and now we find that the chanc of win on the first throw in crap is twice that of lose on the first throw in crap .
should we hasten to the casino and start plai the game ?
not so hasti .
we've forgotten a third eventu .
the possibl that the game doe not conclud on the first throw , but continu .
let us ask now , what is the chanc that you will continu plai crap after the first throw ?
well , the event continu is identifi as an aggreg of six element , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> .
the principl of addit tell us , we comput the probabl of continu by simpli ad up the individu probabl .
and a quick look at our tabl tell us , the chanc of continu in crap is <num> and <num> , or <num> and <num> .
there's a two third chanc , that the game of crap will not conclud on the first throw .
thi is a lion share of the possibl and so the next question would be , of cours , well what if the game continu ?
now what is my chanc of win ?
well that stori will have to wait until we develop a littl more machineri .
so thu far , we have now look at our combinatori set , where we have a chanc experi , with a finit number of outcom , each equal like .
and now move into a set where the outcom ar still finit , but the die is load , the coin is not fair .
the individu outcom do not have an equal chanc .
the next step in the program is to go beyond finit outcom , to set where the outcom ar , at least in principl , infinit .
now , the listen might well ask , well why should i care ?
isn't ani real experi explicitli finit ?
ye , but there is a virtu in consid set where the experi can , as a model , in principl , continu indefinit .
let me give you a concret illustr .
for exampl , in evalu of risk , actuari prepar actuari tabl which provid element where you talk about life expect and the chanc of a life expect .
but these actuari tabl carri on much beyond real life expect .
now , why should we do thi ?
well there ar two reason .
on , you would sai , it is artifici to put a limit on human life , and sai well , you can't live past <num> for exampl .
that is artifici , and clearli there will be occasion , albeit rare exampl , where that number turn out to be insuffici .
so , it is artifici to put constraint on a number .
you might as well imagin a set where thing ar unbound .
a second virtu in allow the number to becom unbound , and in principl , allow infinit or unbound life , is that by not put an artifici boundari around the problem , constrain it , the analysi becom smooth and simpl .
we ar not put into a corset by boundari which ar artifici in natur .
and don't inform us about the essenti natur of the problem .
so in such set , we'll think of a sanit model where we can imagin , conceptu , an experi which goe on forev .
thi is an exampl of a thought experi .
a gedankenexperi .
an experi which can be conceiv of , but which might never actual be done .
thi isn't exactli the same spirit as a euclidean geometri , where we take our understand of thing like line , by take foot rule , or edg of build , or beam of light .
and we axiomat it , we abstract it , and come up with the euclidean idea of a line , be an object which ha got a length without breadth .
but that's absurd , isn't it ?
what is an object which ha length without breadth ?
okai , there's no physic object which ha got length without breadth .
but nonetheless , there's abstract of an essenti idea prove to be enorm power .
it is in the same spirit that we consid experi which have an infinit rang of possibl outcom .
and as we shall see , for mani deep applic , import practic applic , thi kind of model allow us to get to the heart of the matter .
so , ar there experi we can conceiv of which ar not hideous complic , which could , in principl , have an unlimit number of outcom .
well , let's go back , inevit , to the toss of a coin .
here is an experi .
take our favorit coin and toss the coin repeatedli until two success outcom ar the same , until two success toss ar the same .
we could ask a question about such a conceptu experi .
what is the chanc that by the time you termin your success of toss , that you'll have toss the coin four or more time ?
now , here's an experi you can actual do at home .
paus for a moment , try it out .
see , without do ani analysi , whether you can come to an understand of what the chanc might be .
paus for a moment , think about the problem .
come back when you're readi .
okai , you're back .
now , our first step in thi process is to try to come up with a mathemat descript of the possibl outcom of thi experi .
now , let's , befor we write anyth down , imagin what could happen .
well , the experi is clearli go to take more than on toss of the coin , becaus you need two success toss to have the same result .
the smallest number of toss you could imagin would be two .
and if you were to termin after two toss , then it's manifestli clear that both toss have to be head or both toss have to be tail .
excel , we've got a start point .
we've identifi two of the possibl outcom .
head and head , or tail and tail .
what if you don't throw head and head or tail and tail ?
that mean you must have had an altern sequenc of head and tail , either a head and a tail or a tail and a head .
and if that is the case , you would toss the coin again .
mark how there's a possibl that you could repeat what you'd thrown on a second throw .
if that is the case , then you will stop on the third trial .
now a pictur is emerg .
so the third trial , you could have a head , a tail , and a tail , and you stop .
or a tail , and a head , and a head , and you stop .
if at the end of the third trial , you haven't repeat a coin toss , you will toss it a fourth time .
now the pictur is becom appar , and a notat is becom clear as well .
so for exampl , we could start write out the possibl outcom of experi as follow .
head head , tail tail , tail head , head head , tail tail , head tail , head head , tail head , tail tail and so on .
the dot at the end of the screen tell us that thi experi could in principl go on indefinit .
there is no fix bound where the experi end .
you cannot guarante that the experi will be done and dust after <num> toss of the coin or after <num> , <num> toss of the coin or after a million or a billion or ani number whatsoev .
in principl , albeit with an incred small chanc , the experi could go on forev .
now , for it to go on forev , it's clear what must happen .
you must start out with an altern sequenc , and that altern sequenc should persist indefinit .
sure we can conceiv of thi happen .
though of cours the chanc should be veri , veri , veri , veri small that it'd go beyond even more than a few toss .
okai .
thi is an exampl of a gedankenexperi .
you notic that thi experi is never actual done , no on ha ever toss thi game and seen all possibl outcom .
there's an infin of possibl outcom .
but it can certainli be conceiv of be done .
and we can identifi in principl the famili of outcom , of cours without list all of them , but we describ it compactli .
thing like , start with a head , go with an altern seri , and then conclud with two of the same .
oh , thi is nice .
start with a tail , go with an altern seri , and conclud with two of the same .
how long is a seri ?
ani fix integ .
now we have a wai of describ it , visual it , even though of cours we have no earthli hope of write down all possibl .
there's an infin of them .
thi is so far so good .
it get a littl trickier to ascrib an idea of chanc .
so , let me throw out some number at you and see if i can defend number as measur of chanc for each of these outcom .
i claim that the number i've given you in the second row of the tabl ar actual appropri for the problem at hand .
now , how would we go about justifi someth like thi ?
well , an argument might go as follow .
let's start by look at those trial where the experi conclud after two toss .
if that is the case , you must have either thrown two head , or two tail .
now , of all possibl for two toss , well , how mani ar there ?
well , there ar exactli four possibl .
head head , head tail , tail head , and tail tail .
there ar four possibl , and natur enough , becaus we think our coin is fair , we imagin that these four possibl for two toss ar equal like .
if that is the case , then the chanc of see a head head in two toss should be on in four .
and likewis , by an entir similar argument , the chanc of see a tail tail in two toss should again be on in four .
suppos the experi doesn't stop after two toss , but move it on to three toss , how mani possibl for three toss ar there ?
now there ar <num> , or better , <num> to the power of <num> possibl .
<num> time <num> time <num> for each of the three toss .
what ar thei ?
well , we can veri lexicograph write down the possibl if we wish .
and you might want to do that .
head head head , head head tail , head tail head , head tail tail , tail head head , tail head tail , tail tail head , and tail tail tail .
there ar eight possibl .
and again , we have no reason to believ that ani on of them is ani more like than ani of the other .
we assign to each of them equal chanc .
out of those eight possibl , the chanc of get for exampl a tail head head , well , that's on out of the eight equal like possibl , and therefor you assign a chanc of on in eight to tail head head .
and likewis a chanc of on in eight for head tail tail .
and we proce apac .
if you look at four toss , there ar <num> to the power <num> or <num> possibl .
i will not weari you by tell you what thei ar , though you might want to write them down just to make sure that your intuit is now solid .
of those <num> possibl , each of the two possibl where you termin is on of <num> , and therefor you assign a on in <num> chanc .
and now you see that these chanc ar decreas like <num> in a power of <num> .
here now is a measur of chanc for the elementari outcom in an experi which ha a countabl infin of possibl outcom .
now , you might look at thi and sai thi , well , gee , thi is all veri speciou and handwav , but how do i know that the chanc you assign to , let's sai , a termin in <num> toss , in other word , <num> in <num> to the power <num> , is right ?
doesn't , what if you're wrong ?
the short answer to that , of cours , is that the outcom which requir <num> toss have not been fairli test .
let's sai , for exampl , you look at <num> toss or even , sai , <num> toss , the chanc of an experi requir <num> or more toss is , in thi model , <num> in <num> to the <num> .
now , <num> to the <num> is a mind bogglingli larg number .
it's about <num> to the power <num> .
it's about the lifetim of the univers sinc the big bang .
even if we toss a coin everi , onc everi second for the entir lifetim of the observ univers , we would not have exhaust those possibl .
so we could legitim sai that i'm give you a number , and disprov it if you can .
it sure ha not been fairli test .
of cours , these number ar get fantast small .
the second part of the justif will be veri simpli that in the rang of termin with a modest number of toss , let's sai five or six or seven , the number we put down fit wonderfulli well with observ experiment .
and therefor we have no reason to believ that our logic is unsound , and so we extrapol on to an infinit sequenc .
okai , with thi for justif , we now have an experi with a countabl infin of possibl chanc outcom , and we have in a systemat , principl manner assign certainli unequ probabl , chanc to each of these outcom .
now let's look at what the event at hand is .
that your experi requir you to toss the coin four or more time .
recal , our experi ha told us that event mai be identifi with subpopul , aggreg of possibl outcom .
what ar the outcom here that ar appropri to thi event ?
well , clearli enough , all those sequenc which termin in either two head or two tail , which start with four or more end member in the sequenc , thing which ar identifi in the green band stretch out infinit to your right .
and we can can captur an entir infinit green band by a simpl compact notat , let's sai greater than or equal to four toss , and that succinct descript captur an entir infin .
and now we want to figur out what is the natur measur of chanc for thi event , and we appeal immedi to the fundament principl of addit .
the whole is equal to the sum of the individu part .
the probabl of the event that you need four or more toss is the probabl of the event that you need precis the sequenc , head tail head head or the sequenc tail head tail tail , or , and so on .
and we now decompos thi event into an infinit number of shard or piec , and we simpli add the probabl .
bingo .
paus and write thi down .
we've decompos the event greater than or equal to four toss into a sum of individu probabl , but now we've extend our finit intuit to a countabl infinit intuit .
but the logic appear clear .
thi appear to be complet unexception , we believ it , we write it down , appeal to a global principl of addit .
and now , sinc we've got number we've assign to these raw chanc , we veri simpli plug in , and i've group these number pairwis , two at a time , becaus by look at our tabl abov , we see that each of these probabl appear in pair .
there ar two <num> in <num>6th , two <num> in 32s , two <num> in <num> , and so forth .
factor out a <num> , and then add up the remain probabl .
you have notic that each of the term insid their own bracket ha got a factor of <num> in <num> that is common to it .
natur enough , as long experi ha taught us , we factor out the term <num> in <num> .
and what remain insid the bracket is a sum of reciproc power of <num> .
oh , we ar veri familiar with thi .
thi is what , in a first calculu class , we call a geometr seri .
and the geometr seri ident tell us that a geometr seri with paramet on half sum to the reciproc of <num> minu a half .
you do the arithmet and you find the chanc of need four or more toss in thi experi is now on in four .
did your guess come close to thi ?
go back and think about what you did to come up with a guess .
and now look at the analysi and see what went wrong or what went right .
now , let's abstract our kei idea .
now , what have we done so far ?
we've look at five differ chanc experi in veri common place set , throw dice , ball and urn , and coin .
and abstract three critic featur .
thi , then , should be at the heart of a theori of chanc .
again , think of geometri as a metaphor .
we start with an idea of geometri principl by experiment , by build .
but eventu , we cut loos the trap of realiti and abstract out clean , mathemat , sanit element , line , plane , arc , circl , point , from these physic entiti .
but we're cut loos the vestig of realiti , we allow ourselv to focu on the logic heart of the problem .
in veri much the same spirit , we're go to try to extract from these exampl , the kei idea .
which will then allow us to abstract awai the realiti , and look at a mathemat structur .
onc we have such a structur , we can examin it properti , it logic consequ , and it predict , just as we do in euclidean geometri , by prove theorem onc we have a basic axiomat set up in place .
and final , to close the loop , we will then see where these result fit in , in applic in a divers rang of set .
so thi is our game plan but we ar jump ahead .
immedi , what have we done so far ?
let's look at the principl we've had to defin .
so thi is a summari , chanc in commonplac set .
chanc experi ar govern by outcom .
these outcom ar chanc driven , thei ar not predict .
and , we begin by look at outcom , which ar constrain to be in a finit collect of outcom .
thi wa a natur set of communitori probabl .
and then , we move on to look at set where we have more than a finit collect , in fact , potenti infinit collect of outcom .
the first question in a chanc experi for you should alwai be , can i identifi the collect of feasibl outcom of the experi ?
either explicitli , by write them all down .
of cours you can onli do thi if thi is finit , or implicitli , where you see a pattern and us that pattern , you can complet describ a gener outcom .
that is alwai the first question .
what ar the conceptu outcom of the underli chanc experi ?
with thi in hand , the next question is , what ar the event of interest to me ?
and if you go back and look at our exampl , everi event is identifi by a subcollect of the possibl outcom , by an aggreg of the possibl outcom .
your next question then should be , can i model my chanc problem mathemat , compactli , identifi the outcom .
and then identifi the set .
the subcollect of those outcom which trigger the event of interest to me .
thi is alwai the next step in the program .
the final step of the program is , onc i've identifi the subset of interest to me , what is the chanc or the probabl i want to ascrib to it ?
and here , we will inevit resort to thi wonder , transcend principl of addit .
success in solv problem and come up with chanc , estim which ar accur , is good devolv critic again and again upon our abil to take a raw problem , an event and partit it , break it up , into piec which ar logic cohes .
of cours i cannot tell you in advanc how to break up a gener event .
that is go to be what the problem ha to tell us .
but each problem will inform us of the wai to think about it .
and onc we identifi a clean partit , we result to addit , and put the whole togeth by simpli ad up the piec .
thi is the start point for the develop of a rich and fecund theori .
and thi wa the part that andrei kolmogorov follow in <num> .
where he laid down an axiomat basi for the scienc of probabl .
thi will be the content of our next lectur .
tableau <num> , a littl set of theori .
in our last modul , we discuss chanc in commonplac set .
a basic featur that i rose repeatedli in these set wa in the consider of aggreg of outcom , collect of outcom , set of outcom .
the mathemat languag of set provid the alphabet with which we describ element in the theori of chanc .
so at thi time it'll be conveni for us to remind ourselv that basic element of set and oper on set .
we will not need veri much from the basic theori .
thi is the kind of materi which is tradition seen sometim in a high school curriculum in mathemat .
and we will review the basic element that ar need for us to describ chanc element in thi context .
for those of you who ar familiar with basic set and set set oper , you could jump ahead to the summari .
quickli refresh your memori of the basic concept and then move on to our develop of the theori of chanc .
for other , stai with me and we will develop the basic element .
so to begin , what is a set ?
a set is a collect of object .
to focu our attent , pick someth quit commonplac .
let's , for exampl , pick a collect of fruit , sai pear .
i happen to like pear .
now what i'm show you is a collect of eight differ kind of pear .
i understand actual from the pear grower associ .
i didn't know there exist such an entiti , but the pear grower associ actual claim there ar more than <num> , <num> varieti of pear .
but that seem a bit excess for todai's lectur , so we'll begin with eight pear .
and you know what it is ?
these pear ar distinct .
thei've got distinct featur , color , .
the kei element for us is that thei ar distinct type of pear .
and we repres it mathemat by enclos the collect in curli bracket .
and as alwai in thi kind of context when you ar deal with collect of object , aggreg of object , we describ it mathemat succinctli by us curli bracket .
okai .
and so , these curli bracket then connot , for our purpos , eight differ kind of pear .
now , the semant here ar not particularli relev for our purpos .
it is not so critic that the first pear on that list is an anjou pear , or perhap let's sai the fourth or fifth pear on the list is a bosc pear .
what matter is that there ar eight differ object .
now we could have describ these object quit differ .
instead of just put them in a basket and sai well , here ar eight fruit type , we could have list them , sai by their name .
for exampl , anjou , bartlett , starkrimson , bosc , and so forth .
what is materi here is that these name , these imag repres object which we have a common understand for .
the individu pear have particular characterist .
shape , color , perhap tast , textur , where thei ar us .
these provid the underli semant where we want to us these collect .
and thi semant is ordinarili not particularli relev for our purpos .
what matter is there ar eight kind of object .
now with thi kind of understand in mind , we could give these object ani kind of name we wish .
for instanc , we could simpli call the object <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and <num> .
implicit in thi kind of descript is a compact , a common understand .
a dictionari of translat that on assum ha been establish ahead of time .
so in our case , <num> could repres the first kind of pear on that list , perhap an anjou .
<num> could repres a bartlett , the second pear on the list , and so forth .
with thi common understand we might just as well deal with a collect of eight number , <num> through <num> .
or if you wish , letter , a , b , c , d , e , f , g , and h .
the select of descript is dictat by common necess , and an overrid idea is the simpler the better .
noth is wise that complic exist , and in thi case , we pick simpl name , simpl descript for object .
as long , of cours , as there is no possibl for confus .
what about other object that might aris ?
well , let me think about anoth , again , visual kind of set .
you're all familiar with the idea of graph in the calculu .
we describ function typic visual by draw a graph of the function .
graph appear in other area in mathemat as well .
and in graph theori , graph connot entiti which ar describ by two kind of object , commonli call vertic and edg .
you could think of vertic as dot on a page , on dot per vertex .
and you can think of edg as connect between the dot .
draw line between the dot to creat edg .
now , here's a veri simpl kind of graphic structur .
think of a graph on three vertic with some descript of edg .
okai , and here we go .
three vertic , i've number them <num> , <num> , and <num> .
thei appear in , as red dot on your screen .
and now the graph is complet describ onc i tell you there ar three vertic by which edg , which line ar present .
so , we can now in a veri lexicograph wai describ the variou possibl for these entiti .
graph on three vertic by describ systemat graph with no edg , graph with precis on edg , graph with two edg , and final graph with three edg .
you should convinc yourself that i have list all possibl here .
there ar eight differ possibl for graph on three vertic .
now where do these kind of thing aris ?
well , thei aris in all kind of set in the 21st centuri .
if on think of a veri complex social network like facebook or like twitter , we can imagin the particip as vertic in a veri larg graph .
and connect between vertic , for exampl , ar friend in facebook , peopl who see each other .
now you understand or you begin to get a feel for why object like these could becom import in a varieti of engin , scientif and mathemat set .
onc we have establish that we ar go to be deal with graph on three vertic , then we could have an implicit dictionari of translat .
and without explicitli draw them , or exhibit them , or give you graph in a basket , simpli give them name .
our dictionari of translat might sai , let's provid a lexicograph arrang of these graph on three vertic start with graph of no vertic .
and then build up systemat on , two , three , four up to a graph with all edg avail on the three vertic , and that's graph number <num> .
with such a dictionari of translat , the number <num> through <num> then , complet describ the pictur on the left .
what about more complex syntax ?
and now in abstract , set collect that appear routin again and again ar collect or set of number .
and these have a particular import import .
so let's turn to these next .
and , at thi point , you know , we should bear in mind , that the kind of descript i've given you of set is explicit .
for exampl , i've given you a basket , or more formal two curli bracket , which repres thi basket , thi collect .
and insid thi basket , i've been put entiti .
the entiti don't have ani particular order .
all that matter is what is in the basket in that collect .
and for visual clariti we've separ the entiti by comma .
of cours , that wasn't essenti if you could clearli separ them .
but when we're deal with an alphabet involv a common theme , sometim thing run into each other and it'll be us to visual separ them by comma , space , what have you .
these ar all explicit represent .
i've list everyth in the collect .
and okai .
thi make a good start point for describ collect of number .
so let's start with the veri simplest collect .
the simplest collect of number aris in the theori of logic , what is sometim call boolean algebra .
it crop up routin in modern dai binari digit commun .
where the idea is that the basic element for describ object is on of two letter , zero or on , fals or true , ye or no .
now , if you put number around these , the simplest descript is zero and on in some order .
you could sai on , comma , zero , or zero , comma , on .
the arrang doe not make much matter .
again , we enclos thi in curli bracket .
the context's tell us that thi is a set .
a collect of object , veri simpl to be true , on which i am go to actual build some kind of theori , some kind of analysi .
thi is an explicit represent of object at hand .
let's go on to someth a littl bit deeper .
for imagin , consid the throw of a die .
if we imagin that the die face have number on through six paint on them , repres the actual pip we see .
on pip , two pip , all the wai up to six pip .
here's our dictionari of translat .
then is natur to denot the possibl outcom of the throw of a die by on of the number from on through six .
and again we have an explicit represent .
but there's anoth possibl .
we could describ thi collect implicitli .
okai .
and thi is go to becom import when set get richer and richer , and it becom imposs to explicitli list all the possibl .
what would an implicit represent of thi throw of a die mean ?
well , let's gener thi a littl bit .
imagin in on hat a die with mani face , not necessarili six .
well , how mani face ?
well , i don't want to put an apron or a restrict on how mani face a die could have or how mani outcom you could sai .
so what should i call it ?
well , inevit i want to call thi an algebra variabl fix but arbitrari .
and , again , inevit long tradit and custom ha inur us to call such variabl n .
why n ?
well , becaus it is inconceiv that i call it anyth els .
and so now we have a collect of n number repres , for exampl , n face on a tie , n distinct object , n pair , n graph .
again we enclos it in curli bracket .
now , an implicit represent for thi is , we've now have a dictionari of translat .
we've got number on through n .
these ar integ number .
so an implicit represent would be to write down a gener letter repres an element of that set , of that collect .
in thi case , again , long custom tell us to write down a letter , lowercas n , to repres a typic number .
notic how we've describ thi .
we first write down a gener , a typic element of the set .
n , fix but arbitrari .
put in a colon and sai follow thi , thi object describ is describ by thi condit .
now thi give us a gener wai of describ more and more complex set .
thi is a descript or implicit wai of describ a set .
let's move on to a slightli richer collect .
where do you go beyond a finit collect ?
well , of cours an infinit collect .
and the simplest infinit collect is that of the natur number .
how do we describ them ?
well , if we want try to rescript , describ it explicitli , i would start by write down the number on , then the number two , possibl the number three .
and then i realiz well i realli cannot write down all possibl natur number .
there's an infinit number of them .
and so we put down a sequenc of dot .
and the dot mean and so on and so forth .
thi is the idea .
thi is an attempt at an explicit represent for these number .
how would an implicit represent look like ?
how would a descript represent look like ?
well , we write down a gener letter n and sai that thi n satisfi the follow properti .
we describ the properti that a typic member of the set satisfi .
in thi case , n is ani natur number .
and now we have it , an implicit or descript notat for thi .
now thi set is wide seen , and it's huge import .
and therefor , long tradit ha given us a name for it .
and thi name is a short form which captur the entir set much like somebodi's name is a short wai of describ that person .
in thi case , a name for a natur number is given by a boldfac letter n .
now , thi blackboard bold font mean from now on the system of natur number .
and thi is the notat we adopt for it .
where do we go from the natur number ?
well , histori tell us that a zero wa discov somewher in the middl east or perhap india .
and onc a zero is discov , neg number were discov , and these then creat the famili of a set of integ .
these ar import .
we'll see them repeatedli .
thei have a name denot by blackboard bulg zed , and thei connot explicitli all integ we're familiar with , zero , on and minu on , two and minu two , three and minu three and so on .
and the descript notat sai thi is a collect of letter n where n is ani integ .
still more complex order of infin ar avail and , of cours , the most common on for us is the real line .
the real line now move from count object onto a continuum of object .
the notat or the languag for it is blackboard bold r .
we denot it by a line , and we implicitli think of a real line of length .
we sometim repres it by an open interv familiar from calculu run from minu infin on on hand to plu infin on the other .
and you describ it by sai it's a collect of object x .
why x ?
again , becaus it is inconceiv i call a real number anyth els , isn't it ?
and x must satisfi the follow properti .
it is a real number in the rang from minu infin to plu infin .
of cours the name that we give these object don't make much matter .
we could choos other name for integ .
for exampl , tradit compel us to us letter in the middl portion of the latin alphabet , i , j , k , l , m and n , typic to denot integ .
n denot a gener such integ .
similarli for real number , tradit compel us to us letter at the end of the latin alphabet , s , t , u , v , w , x , y and z .
and we us x as a typic or gener member .
now these kind of set or system ar go to be import to us .
thu far , we have seen variou exampl of set .
collect , which aris in variou kind of applic .
it will be us to have in mind a gener abstract set , on which we ar go to be pend our analysi .
and so let's begin by think about some abstract for all of thi .
at the back of our mind , in what our applic is at hand , we'll be deal with some set of possibl , a univers set .
in the theori of chanc , we will frequent call thi the sampl space .
we ar imagin that we're actual sampl , pick out element from thi collect , from thi basket of possibl .
in the theori of probabl , the standard represent for a univers set , the sampl space , is the upper case greek letter omega .
and we will from now on repres an abstract set , a univers set , by upper case omega .
what about the element of the set ?
well , the element of the set ar denot then , natur enough , by lower case omega .
and we will sai that these ar the element of the univers set of a sampl point of the set .
in specif set , we will dispens with thi abstract notat , and us notat that tradit compel us to us .
so for exampl , if you're deal with natur number or the integ .
thei'll us blackboard bold z , and you'll repres typic integ by letter like n , or occasion i , j , k , l , or m .
if you're deal with a real line , we'll us blackboard bold r , instead of capit omega .
and repres gener member by x , y , z , occasion u or v or s or t .
and if we're deal with function , sai continu function , we'll repres them by script c .
and of cours , a gener function is repres by f , occasion g or h or someth els .
we will not be hidebound and insist on stai with notat , which is tradit , if circumst tell us it'll be better to us some other descript .
but of cours , you understand these ar natur , norm descript of these kind of object .
now , it'll be conveni to have a short mathemat notat to sai thi is an element of the set .
right , so let's sai we're deal with a univers set , an abstract set , uppercas omega .
we will indic membership of uppercas omega by sai an element , littl omega , is an element of uppercas omega and we have a short mathemat notat , mean all of that .
and we will consist us thi standard notat .
so here is on abstract set , at on end of the spectrum , a , an abstract univers set , upper case omega .
on the other end of the spectrum , we have the trivial set , a set with noth in it .
i wonder , why would we bother with someth which ha noth it ?
well , it's becaus , as a preview , we ar go to be abl to to algebra on these object .
the kind of arithmet in algebra that you ar veri familiar with from elementari school and middl school .
and of cours , when you do arithmet or algebra , we have an idea of a zero .
the empti set and here is the standard notat for it , a circl with a cross line through it .
thi repres , in a fundament sens , a zero in the idea of an algebra offset .
for us , the empti set is an , a set which ha no element in it .
okai , so thu far , we have now built up some languag , some wai of describ collect of abstract object .
where do we go from here ?
the next set is to consid subcollect of these object .
so bear in mind that at the back of the experi , there is alwai a univers set of possibl , omega .
and we ar go to be deal with element from omega .
now , a subcollect of these element from omega , is call natur a subset .
and the mathemat notat , compactli on the right of the screen , tell you how we can describ these subset .
so that notat sai , a is a subcollect , it is a sub set of thi bigger set , omega , in thi case the univers set .
now , obstruct is all well and good , but we respond well to visual stimuli and some visual represent , sometim , ar veri us for see the relationship between variou abstract object .
in the set of set , these visual represent ar call venn diagram .
and , i've given you here on the screen , a represent of a subset of a univers set .
i've repres the univers set by a rectangl , that's omega .
you should think of your , the element of omega as point in that set somewher .
and a subset shown natur as a blob insid thi collect .
it connot a subcollect of the element of omega .
you should bear in mind that thi is pure for visual represent .
there is no intent to convei ani kind of geometri .
an area doesn't mean anyth here thi is pure a represent on paper of an abstract object .
and sometim , these represent give us some kind of cue as to how thing interact with each other .
well , thi is all veri abstract .
so , some concret exampl might allow us to settl these concept .
well , what ar the simplest exampl of subset ?
well , the simplest exampl ar , well , a could be omega itself .
omega itself is a subcollect of itself .
in other word , if your subcollect contain all the element of the origin set , it is the origin set , and here's a trite and simpl subset .
at the other end of the spectrum , if your set a ha got no element in it , in other word , it is the empti set .
that is also patent a subcollect , a subset of the whole .
of cours , these ar trite and obviou .
let's stitch togeth some more interest exampl to settl the concept .
so let's begin with the set where , let's sai we throw a die .
we then defin pip by number , on pip through six pip , with the number <num> through <num> .
thi is the dictionari of translat that we agre on ahead of time .
the set at hand , the univers set , is then the collect of number from <num> through <num> in ani order you like .
suppos i'm interest in a throw which exce four .
thi describ a subcollect , a subset , and we identifi it as the element five and six togeth .
and so now we have a subset a consist of element five and six which is a subset of the set of possibl the number <num> through <num> .
let's pick a , an exampl from the second exampl i've shown you on set , from graph .
imagin a graph on a certain number of vertic , sai n .
the famili of all such graph is potenti a larg famili , if n is larg .
for exampl , you could imagin a set where we're look at flight between citi .
citi repres vertic in a graph .
edg between citi show that there ar direct flight between citi .
and now we can understand , well here's a set for transport .
thi give us a famili , a set , a univers set , the set of graph .
those graph , which , for exampl , let's sai have two edg , repres a sub collect a sub set of graph on these .
still anoth exampl and now let's go on into the domain of number .
the collect of prime number have drawn interest sinc antiqu .
and in the modern dai , ar vital import in electron commerc , through provid secur through cryptographi .
prime number ar at the heart of cryptograph protect scheme .
the collect of prime number , the number two , three , five , seven , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so on .
you could knew there were an infin of prime number , okai , and you might have seen a proof of thi in an elementari class .
but the collect of prime number clearli is a subcollect of the collect of integ .
the prime number ar a subset of the integ .
if we move on to the real number line , we can think of other rich connect , subcollect of the whole .
for exampl , fraction , in other word , ration number denot by blackboard bold q , is a subset of the real line .
all right , so we now have an understand of what subset might mean and we think of venn diagram as wai of repres , visual , relationship .
now where do we go from here ?
well , natur enough , we want to consid more than on subset .
so let's look at the possibl when we have more than on set at hand .
bear in mind that there is an abstract univers set chug along in the background provid element from which you're draw subset .
now suppos we have a second subset of omega .
so now let's sai we have a set a , and natur enough , we call the next set b .
well , what could the relationship between a and b be ?
well , both a and b repres subset of thi omega .
and i've shown you visual a schema where it is clear that everi element in a in the particular set our man wa ag is contain in the collect b that i'm show you .
i have not told you exactli what omega is , and what a is , and what b ar .
but more toward the underli abstract relationship , i'm sai that thi kind of pictur connot a membership , an inclus .
everi member of a in the set is in b .
or a itself is a subset of b .
now , two gener set don't necessarili have to have thi kind of inclus relationship .
so , at the other end of the spectrum , we could have a set where a and b ar subset of some omega , and thei share no element whatsoev .
thi turn into a veri import basic concept .
it's visual clear .
you have two collect , and thei do not overlap .
if that is the case , we see that these subset ar disjoint .
and we creat some more compact mathemat notat to captur the idea that two set ar disjoint .
we write a , and then a symbol denot a cup upsid down , b .
thi , in word we sai , a intersect b .
and thi is a small and quick preview of the set oper intersect which you will encount on the next slide .
and we sai that a cup b , a intersect b , is empti .
we sai the intersect of a and b is empti .
in altern languag , we sai that a and b ar disjoint .
and what be mean by all of thi is that a and b share no element in common .
there is no omega which is in a and in b .
of cours , these ar not the onli two possibl .
more typic , we'll get someth like the pictur in the middl of your screen .
where you have two subset of an abstract set omega , and thei overlap .
thei ar not mutual exclus .
thei're not disjoint .
nor is on complet contain in anoth .
each of them ha element , littl omega , which the other doe not have .
and , again , thi is visual clear in thi kind of set even though i've not specifi for you what the set ar .
but thei also contain some element from the origin univers set , which ar common to both .
okai .
and thi kind of pictur is more gener .
and it behoov us to look at it and sai , well , okai , if we have a set like thi where we have two abstract subset of some abstract univers set .
and thei have some kind of relationship like thi .
what can i do with them ?
well , natur enough , we can construct more subset .
richer subset from these basic subset .
and thi is where the heart of the , of the nomenclatur , the terminolog is go to be .
so you should pai attent here .
and i'm go to articul three basic oper .
and these oper will inform all of the set theoret manipul we will need .
from these we can build other more complex oper .
let's consid , how to creat new set from old , us basic binari set theoret oper .
the kind of pictur you have mental is of some univers set .
a subset a , some of the subset b , and the set , potenti can overlap in some or all element .
the simplest of the oper or on of the two simplest oper we can imagin , is we're simpli lump everyth togeth into a bigger basket , into a bigger set .
thi oper is call a union .
and the word union in set theori ha a veri particular connot .
it repres the mathemat object on the right of your screen .
it repres visual by the bigger blob i've given you .
it stand , if you've done ani boolean algebra or logic , for the logic or oper .
and we describ it compactli , succinctli by a at b with a connect oper which look like a smile , a cup face up .
we call thi a union b in word and thi stand for a consolid set .
it is , in our descriptor notat , a collect of element , littl omega , colon , satisfi the follow properti .
littl omega is in a , or littl omega is in b .
notic thei includ such relationship which ar put in there .
notic it's a small , compact descript of what thi object is .
bear in mind that in mathemat logic and in set theori , or's ar not exclus .
what thi mean is littl omega can be in a or it can be in b or actual it could be in both .
so we ar us or , unlik in casual languag , we ar us or in a non exclus sens .
in ordinari languag when we us the word or , we implicitli think of it as be exclus .
thi or that , but not both .
but in the set here , we mean , either or both .
look , here's a simplest oper for build a more complex set , from two basic set .
the union oper .
as alwai , when there a mathemat equat on screen , you should take the time to write them down , paus , absorb them , befor you continu .
when you're readi , start again .
the next of the fundament oper , is call the intersect oper .
for those of you who have done boolean algebra , it's stand for a logic and .
we denot , as you saw in the previou slide , us a frown or a cup upsid down .
we sai a intersect b .
and that repres , is defin by the descript on the right .
it stand for the collect of object , littl omega , of cours , it is underli univers abstract set .
which satisfi the follow properti , littl omega is in a and also in b .
and if you're look at our venn diagram , then we're think of those point which ar in the sliver , in the len , which is occupi by the intersect of those two object .
right , so the venn diagram give us a visual idea of what is go on .
as a saniti check , you should ask , well what if a and b ar disjoint ?
what is the intersect ?
as you saw on the previou slide , if the set ar disjoint , a here , b here , and there's noth in common , then the intersect must be the empti set .
it's got no element .
the third basic oper is that of negat .
in set theori it's call the complement oper .
in boolean algebra , it correspond to the logic not oper and we give it the follow name , descript , which stand for a formal definit .
the complement of a , in word .
we repres it by a with a styliz c as a superscript .
the c , of cours , stand for complement .
negat , the not oper .
all of thi stand for a set .
what is a set ?
those element littl omega which do not belong to a .
notic that we'll us an inclus relationship in the membership oper with a slash across it .
the slash sai that it is not a member , so we're look at element omega which ar not in a .
and all element omega with the properti that thei're not in a form the set call the complement of a , and we denot it ac .
visual , again , it's as if you've got your abstract space , your univers set .
upper case omega and you excis , surgic remov , all the element which form the subset a .
what remain is a complement .
again , you should take the time to write down these relationship , ponder them , absorb the notat , the languag , the logic , make sure you understand them draw a pictur or two befor you proce .
and now as a saniti check , let's try thi .
suppos you look at a set which is the complement of a .
a with a superscript c .
well that's a set , and it is a subset of the origin univers set .
natur enough , i could imagin do a compliment of that set .
what is the compliment of the compliment of a ?
paus , think about it , scribbl , write it down .
identifi thi on your venn diagram befor you proce .
did you get a ?
if you negat a negat , you get back the origin .
that's veri loos , two neg make a posit , okai ?
thi is the idea .
and how do you verifi thi ?
well , let's look at the compliment of the compliment .
ani omega in the compliment of the compliment cannot be in the compliment .
but if it is not in the compliment then it must be in the origin set .
therefor everi omega in the compliment of the compliment is in the origin set , and vice versa .
and therefor , the compliment of the compliment is a itself .
with these three basic cooper , we can construct veri , veri rich set , and in fact , all set theoret oper can be reduc to repeat oper involv union , intersect , and compliment .
two specif such oper orca often enough that thei work take notic off and give specif name to and let's take a look at them next .
the first of these connot a differ oper , except of cours , unlik an ordinari numer differ of two number .
thi is a set differ .
sometim it's written as a minu b .
but it's prefer to us a differ separ instead of a minu sign .
a minu sign is load , it connot veri , veri specif numer thing in our brain .
so let's denot a set theoret differ , by a back slash .
so , an a back slash b , in word we will sai thi as a minu b .
it stand for a set , which is construct from the constitu subset a and b as follow .
it consist of those omega which lie in a , and at the same time , do not lie in b .
now , notic we've construct a descript which is link by an and .
and that bring to mind immedi the intersect oper becaus that's what an intersect is , it is a logic and .
thi is equival of sai i must be in a and not in b , but not in b mean that i'm in the compliment of b and therefor a minu b is just a short wai of sai , the intersect of a with b compliment .
again , you've seen the littl half moon , which visual repres what's go on , in thi kind of set theoret oper .
i don't know , is that a gibbou moon or someth like that .
now , you understand immedi that thi kind of oper is not transit .
you can't simpli chang the order .
the analog is not perfect , but just like we can't simpli swap the order of numer object that you're subtract from each other .
you also , in gener cannot simpli swap set in the order in which we take set theoret differ .
so here , as a saniti check , verifi the follow .
what is a set , b minu a ?
iden , identifi it on your venn diagram .
write down what it is in term of intersect .
and when you're readi , proce .
now , when you come back , did you get a compliment intersect b ?
and of cours you realiz we can get thi by simpli interchang the role of a and b on the definit of the equat i have given you .
if you just swap the order of a and b , you'll get exactli b minu a .
now , sinc a minu b and b minu a ar in gener , differ , we can combin them to make someth which is symmetr in term of differ and thi is call a symmetr differ .
again , for those of you who ar familiar with boolean algebra , thi connot a logic , exclus or .
the symmetr differ of a and b is denot a with a littl delta and a b , a littl triangl and a b , and that stand for a set describ more robustli on the right .
it stand for the collect of object littl omega , which ar precis on of a and b .
so either omega is in a and not in b or omega is in b and not in a .
at the moment we sai or , we sai oh ye , that sound like a union oper and inde , there's a union lurk in the background .
sinc omega ha to be in precis on of a and b , it's got to be either in a , or in b , but not in both .
if it is in a , then it must be in a minu b .
if it is in b on the other hand , then it must be in b minu a .
and either of these case trigger the exclus or , the symmetr differ .
and therefor , the symmetr differ between a and b is a union of the set differ , a minu b and b minu a .
if you want to think of it visual , of cours , it is thi conglomer of element with the intersect excis from the middl .
now these ar the basic oper , the on you should realli rememb union , intersect , compliment , and it is worth while think of the set differ and symmetr differ as well .
these crop up occasion in applic .
write these down , memor the definit .
these ar on of the few thing you should hardwir in your mind .
and when you feel comfort that you understand what these concept ar , let's , as a test case , simpli go ahead and do a test of concept .
now , thi ha got no particular valu or import whatsoev , other than in simpli test to see that you understand the definit .
let's start with a univers set consist of the number on through ten .
thei could connot anyth you like .
the semant ar not relev for our purpos .
suppos a is a set of four element i've shown you .
and let's suppos b is a set of anoth four element which i've also shown you there .
determin the variou compliment , the union , the intersect , the set differ in both direct and the symmetr differ of all of these .
write them down .
and when you're readi check the answer against what i will show you befor we can proce .
well here ar these variou oper .
there ar two kind of complement thei could take , the complement of a or the complement of b .
there's on union oper .
there's on intersect oper .
there ar two kind of set differ a b and b a .
and there's on symmetr differ .
verifi that you've got these .
if you haven't natur you need to go back and look at the definit again and make sure you understand thi .
so let us begin with a set involv the war of adai .
the time is the 17th centuri .
and thi wa a period of intellectu awaken in western europ and in the unit kingdom .
in the earli 1600s , the ideal of seri and sequenc had alreadi been provid .
and calculu wa wait to peek coyli around the corner near the end of the centuri .
and it wa at thi time that in 17th centuri franc , the intellectu engag in salon caus a , an erupt of idea .
in particular , in the theori of chanc .
a name associ with thi is that of the chevali de mere .
hi real name wa antoin gombaud .
he wa a , a writer and also an intellectu , a promin salon purist .
and a problem that he pose ha now come to be associ with him and it's call de mere's problem or de mere's paradox .
it's a veri simpli word problem and it wa known well befor de mere and it can be state in simpl term as you see on the screen .
if on look at two game of chanc , on in which on take a regular six side fair die and throw it four time in success .
on want to bet on whether in those four throw , on achiev at leas on ac .
an ac in the common parlanc in card or in dice connot a surfac with a singl pip .
or occasion , a , an outcom which ha the largest valu .
let us for our purpos take an ac in term of dice to mean the show of a face with six pip .
so the question that de mere pose wa is it more advantag to wager on get at least on ac in four throw of on die .
or is it prefer , is it more like that if on throw a pair of dice , <num> time .
that somewher in those <num> throw , on get a pair of ac .
i'll paus to let you think about thi for a moment .
where doe your intuit lead you ?
all right .
now you had a chanc to think about it .
let me begin by throw out an analysi , which is suspici and actual incorrect .
here is how an argument might go , a naiv argument .
when on throw a die , everi face is equal like .
and so in particular , a six or an ac ha got a on in six chanc of appear .
sinc on is throw the die four time , there is a four in six chanc of get an ac .
now it sound reason , but let's carri on .
if on appli thi logic to throw of a pair of dice , then when on throw a pair of dice , the chanc of observ a doubl ac .
well , there ar <num> possibl for the pair of dice .
so to get a doubl ac , there's a on in <num> chanc of see a doubl ac .
and therefor , if on throw a pair of dice <num> time , the chanc of observ a doubl ac should then be <num> in <num> .
both of these case result in two third .
and therefor , a naiv argument might sai .
well , there's an equal chanc of observ either a singl ac in four throw of on die or a doubl ac in twenti four throw of a pair of dice .
simpl but incorrect .
now thi logic is in the popular literatur , frequent attribut to de mere .
but there ar reason to doubt whether he actual commit such a sloppi piec of analysi .
on can veri quickli see why an argument like thi is go to break .
what is the kei principl at the heart of such an argument ?
well , if on identifi the kei central idea , it would be thi .
that the chanc of observ a success increas proportion with the number of trial .
thu , for exampl , if on is toss a die repeatedli and if on want to observ an ac , the chanc of observ an ac in is on in six per trial .
and therefor , in two trial , we anticip a two in six chanc .
in three trial , a three and six of four trial four and six and so on .
but of cours , thi is manifestli absurd .
in six trial then , the chanc of observ an ac should be six and six or it should be certain that we observ an ac in six throw .
but thi is clearli patternli ridicul .
in fact , if you go beyond six throw it'll sai , you ar more than certain that you ar , we will observ an ac .
someth ha clearli gone wrong with the logic .
what is it ?
well , the set is simpl enough that we can directli do an analysi us pure combinatori argument .
let us begin .
in thi set , on start with a die and throw it repeatedli .
onc .
twice .
thrice .
and four time .
the veri first throw happen to give us an ac and we were done .
now let's see if we can abstract thi idea .
okai .
and the combinatori notion of ball and urn give us a conveni metaphor to captur thi model experi .
so imagin that each throw is repres by a ball .
so you have ball on for throw on .
ball two for throw two .
ball three for throw three .
ball four for throw , for throw four .
each throw can result in on of six possibl phrase , six possibl result .
label these possibl result on , two , three , four , five and six by six distinct urn as seen in your figur .
and now schemat , as on doe the experi , ball on goe in thi case to urn five .
throw two result in on , throw three in five , throw four in two .
and you've got a sequenc of throw outcom model schemat .
now we can compact all of thi in a veri simpl arrang .
all we have to do is specifi in order the valu that each throw gave us .
all we have to do is specifi in order four differ urn correspond to the valu that were seen .
and in thi case , we get a sequenc five .
the first throw gave us a five .
on , the second throw gave us a on .
five again , the third throw gave us a five .
and two , the fourth throw gave us a two .
now we have the begin of a terminolog and notat structur for thi problem .
okai .
so let's quickli abstract thi and look at what the gener set is .
bear in mind that what we ar look for is the emerg of the true .
which give us a six , an ac .
and so we ar look for the presenc of an ac anywher in the sequenc of four outcom that you have seen .
now in gener , you can get ani set of four outcom , and we need some notat for thi .
let's call the first throw of the die a valu k1 .
the second throw , a valu k2 , valu k3 , valu k4 .
the result of your four di throw ar now given by an order sequenc of four number .
it's an order sampl of size four , sampl from the collect of six end , with replac .
throw can repeatedli gener in principl the same valu , the same urn .
and now we have a set of sampl with replac .
thi is veri simpl .
how mani possibl sequenc of throw ar there ?
well , sinc it's sampl , a sampl of size four with replac from a popul of size six , the answer is immedi <num> to the power <num> .
so the number of differ outcom for the experi is veri larg .
we have <num> to the power <num> differ outcom for the experi .
of all these outcom , which outcom result in observ an ac somewher in your four throw ?
well , in a set like thi , it is easier to examin what'll happen if the of what is desir happen .
what is the complement of what we desir ?
well , the complement of what we desir is that none of the throw result in an ac .
which mean that we ar look at string of four number where none of the four number is a six .
altern , thi mean we ar look at an order sampl of size four drawn from a popul of the first five urn alon , eschew the last or the sixth urn .
well thi immedi is again sampl with replac , but from a smaller popul of five urn thi time .
the number of possibl is <num> to the power <num> .
and therefor , there ar <num> to the power <num> possibl outcom for the experi where you do not observ an ac .
out of <num> to the power <num> possibl result with the experi where you look at all possibl outcom .
the chanc of not observ an ac therefor , becaus natur enough , all outcom in these toss ar consid to be equal like , is <num> to the power <num> , divid by <num> to the power of <num> .
the chanc therefor of observ at least on ac , is obtain by subtract thi quantiti from <num> .
and so , let's put in some notat here .
let's write the upper case letter a to denot the event that in four throw of my die , we obtain at least on ac .
let's write an upper case bold font letter p to denot the chanc , or the probabl of that event .
and therefor in notat , we captur thi by sai p a , the probabl of the event a is <num> minu <num> to the power <num> , divid by <num> to the power of <num> .
evalu show that thi is approxim <num> .
so far , so good .
the analysi , you'll agre , wa not at all hard .
it requir a proper understand of what experi wa , suitabl abstract out the combinatori element and just simpli write down estim of variou quantiti involv sampl with replac .
now , what about the event , b , where we throw a pair of dice <num> time , and we ar look for a doubl ac .
well , onc we've done a problem , we should not be cavali in throw awai our intuit .
we should begin with our understand and see whether we can extend that to the new set .
and let's try to see how we can do thi .
so rememb , that , in throw on die four time , the chanc of see at least an ac , per our calcul , is about <num> , <num> . <num> .
our experi now involv throw a pair of dice .
and thei're go to throw the pair of dice repeatedli onc , twice , thrice , and so on until we've thrown them <num> time .
what would an appropri model be for such an experi ?
if we were to draw upon our intuit , where we threw on die repeatedli , then we should identifi each throw of a pair of dice with a ball .
in which case we have <num> distinguish ball , on repres each throw .
each throw give us two face .
how mani differ out , outcom or possibl ar there ?
well the first die ha six face .
the second die ha six face .
so togeth there ar <num> time <num> , or <num> possibl for each throw of a pair of dice .
it is easiest to repres thi graphic in a six by six grid .
now at thi point , each squar on the grid repres a possibl pair of face .
and now we throw the dice repeatedli and we identifi which throw land in which pair of face .
on , two , three , four , five .
all the wai up through <num> .
you will notic that our 16th throw , land up with a pair of ac , which wa what wa desir .
so , the kei element wa of cours , the squar in the upper right of your screen , where a throw result in a pair of , of ac .
how should we model thi in gener ?
well of cours notat is go to get inescap more cumbrou .
we have more move part but the principl is go to be the same .
the first throw is repres by a pair of number .
the second throw by anoth pair of number .
a third by a third pair of number .
the 24th by a , the 24th pair on number .
let's call them j1 and k1 , for the result of the first throw .
j2 and k2 for the result of the second throw .
j24 , k24 for the result on the 24th throw .
the notat is admittedli much more co , cumbrou , but the principl and logic element at the heart of the argument is no bit differ from what we encount when we threw on die .
now , a , an outcom of the experi correspond to give me a sequenc of <num> pair .
each pair land in on of <num> urn , or <num> possibl .
thi correspond to again , a sampl with replac scenario .
the same urn , the same fair pair of face valu , could recur again and again and again .
how mani possibl ar there for the experi as a whole ?
well thi is an order sampl of size <num> drawn from a popul of size <num> .
and therefor , the total number of outcom of thi experi is a mind bogglingli larg number , <num> to the power <num> .
how mani of these result in at least on doubl ac ?
as befor , it is easier to ask the obvers question .
how mani of these result in no doubl ac ?
thi is the complement of the event at hand .
now , if there ar no doubl ac , then a pair j , k can take ani valu with j run from on through five and k run from on through five .
on of the two could be six , but both cannot .
thi mean that in your squar of <num> possibl , you issu just the element in the northeast corner .
just the element label , <num> , <num> .
and so , each throw ha now <num> possibl , where a doubl ac is not seen .
and now again , it's sampl with replac from <num> possibl .
and so the number of outcom that ar favor for the event that there is no doubl ac is <num> to the power of <num> .
the ratio of <num> to the <num> over <num> to the <num> natur now is our probabl that we do not observ a doubl ac .
and therefor , the probabl that at least on doubl ac is seen somewher in the cours of <num> throw of a pair of dice is <num> minu thi ratio .
evalu show that thi clock in at just about <num> .
again , in notat , a bold font p for probabl .
the letter b for the event that on or more doubl ac ar seen in <num> throw .
and we read thi as sai , p of b , the probabl of b is about <num> . <num> .
now , we can take a coupl of immedi lesson from thi .
on , calcul involv probabl in such combinatori set veri quickli involv huge quantiti .
we have a massiv numer divid by a massiv denomin .
in such set , we ar ill equip to guess at what the answer might be .
noth in our common experi prepar us adequ for handl such larg ratio .
and so , it should come as no surpris at all that intuit can frequent flounder in such set , even with appar veri simpl game .
but the analysi is quit elementari .
it just requir an understand , care to be sure of a set where we have sampl with replac .
and now , a consider of the two possibl show us that it is margin .
more better , more like .
that we observ a singl ac in four throw of a dice , then that we observ a doubl ac in <num> throw of a pair of dice .
thi would not have been easi to anticip .
okai .
but thi is what it is .
these number ar close .
thei ar both veri close to mimick a fair coin , but the event a is margin more like .
it's slightli more advantag to wager on get on ac or more in four throw of a die than in wager on a pair of ac in <num> throw of a pair of dice .
in , in the fork law , in the literatur it is the stori is often told with a romant cast to it .
themari is identifi as an aristocrat , which actual wa not true .
he wa a common , antoin gombaud wa hi real name .
he is identifi as an itiner gambler and thi again wa perhap not strictli accur .
gombaud wa actual a writer and a thinker .
he wa a promin salon theorist of that time .
but thi stori , which take ha leg becaus of frequent repetit is cost of the follow the term .
the mari did thi calcul on naiv calcul and conclud that the odd were two third for both case .
and so from a theoret point of view , he believ that the case should have the same chanc .
but base on empir evid and so the stori goe , he won a lot of ma , monei on possibl a and lost a lot of monei on possibl b .
and therefor , on empir ground , he doubt hi theori .
and so he went and ask the mathematician , philosoph , logician blais pascal hi take on the stori and pascal set him right .
there's consider reason to doubt thi stori on all front .
on gombaud wa actual a common and a writer .
he took to call himself chevali , which mean knight in french .
after a charact in on of hi novel who espous the kind of belief that he himself did and he studi in mari .
and therefor , he becam the knight of mari , chevali the mari and thi is hi popular monik .
he ha gone down in histori and thi problem is veri associ with him .
perhap not so much that he actual solv the problem , but becaus he initi a dialog of the veri foundat of chanc .
and thi , in the middl of the 17th centuri went on to revolution scienc .
it creat the seed for a magnific modern endeavor , the theori of chanc .
we have now come to a right understand of the concept of a univers abstract set , of subset of that set , and how to build , via set oper , more complex subset from exist subset .
the kei oper ar union , intersect and complement .
now with these under our belt , we can actual now do some algebra on the set , and in a particular form that we shall talk about shortli .
so here is the basic idea .
when , when i sai algebra what , what come to mind ?
well , when we do arithmet or algebra , we realiz well , we add , we multipli .
okai .
when we add , a kei element is the idea of a zero .
if you add a zero to ani number , you just just keep that number .
when you multipli , a kei element is a on .
if you multipli ani number by on , you get back that number .
in the structur of set , we have specif set which have these properti .
and these plai the roll of a zero at a unit in the algebra of set , right .
so , if on take , let's sai , a subset a , and again we have in mind an abstract , univers set , uppercas omega in the , lurk in the background as it were .
if you have a subset a and you take it union with the empti set , well what do you get ?
natur enough , the empti set ha got noth in it .
a union just expand by pull in everyth in both the set , but the empti set ha noth and therefor you re , re , retain the origin set .
the empti set plai the role of a zero .
take the union of the empti set doe not chang the origin set .
what happen if we take the intersect of your set a with the entir univers set omega ?
well , sinc everi element of a is an omega , manifestli , then the intersect contain everi element in a and noth els .
in other word , the intersect of a with omega is a itself .
omega stand in the role of a multipl unit .
oh , veri good , so it look like we have thing which correspond to a zero and a on .
what about addit and multipl more gener , yeah ?
what ar the kei properti that come to mind when you talk about addit and multipl ?
natur enough , we can add in ani order , and we can multipli in ani order .
and thi is what is kei , about addit and multipl .
now take the time to write down the ident i've given you on the screen .
ponder them for a while and when you're readi , let's deconstruct them , make sure we come to a right understand of what these veri basic ident repres .
oh , now that you're back , let's take a look at the veri first ident i've shown you .
the assert is that a union b is the same as b union a .
now i will put it to you that thi is manifest and trite .
we could do a formal proof of thi , but it is hardli worth the effort .
let us , in re , pictur what a union b is .
it is a collect of element littl omega , which ar in a or in b or in both .
but if thei're ar in a or in b or in both , thei belong to the ensembl .
it doe not matter which order i specifi a and b doe it ?
in ani case , omega is go to be in a or b or in both .
and therefor a union b is the same as b union a .
you can do union in ani order without chang the outcom .
and the same thing hold manifestli for intersect .
a intersect b , is the set of element omega , which lie both in a and in b .
or , in other word , which lie both in b and in a .
in other word , a intersect b , and b intersect a ar exactli the same set .
union and intersect can be done in ani order .
of cours thi , in algebra , in arithmet , is what , what we call the commut properti of addit and multipl .
just like addit and multipl , union and intersect ar commut .
now what we go beyond two subset ?
suppos we throw in a third subset .
natur enough i'm go to call it c .
again , bear in mind there's an abstract univers set in the background .
a , b and c ar purportedli repres subset of that univers set .
on could draw a venn diagram here , but of cours it's get more complex here to show the variou interrelationship between the three object .
if i have three such subset , i could function as follow .
first consid the particular subset obtain by take the union of b with c .
well , that's a set .
what if i take the union of that set with a ?
and , to clarifi that here's the order in which i'm do thing , we natur enough us parenthes .
we us round bracket to sai first , take the unit of b with c , and then take that set and take it union with a .
now the assert is that you would get exactli the same set if you first took the union with b , a with b , then took that set and took it union with c .
now again , thi is almost so trite as to be not worth mention .
all we have to do is keep in mind what is happen when , onc i do all these union .
the result in either case is a sampl point omega , which is in a or in b or in c , the or be not exclus .
mean that thei could in both a and b , or both a and c , or both b and c , or perhap in a and b and c as well .
but thi descript of omega is the same for the quantiti on the left as well as the quantiti on the right .
and therefor these two wai of describ thi composit set must be the same .
exactli the same kind of argument work when you talk about intersect .
the intersect of b with c , intersect with a is the same as the intersect of a with b , intersect with c .
in both instanc i'm talk about sampl point omega , which lie in all three of a , b , and c .
thi , of cours , is what in ordinari arithmet we call the associ properti , of addit , and of multipl .
so union and intersect ar commut and associ .
in other word , you can do them in ani order .
now onc you understand that i can do an associ properti with three set , i can do it with four , with five , with n set .
and of cours , veri quickli we're run out of symbol in the alphabet .
we captur thi abstractli , natur enough on of the wai of do thi is to us subscript , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , up to sai n for some finit number , to connot which subset we ar talk about .
so a , subscript <num> will be on set subset , a subscript <num> will be anoth subset , a subscript n will be the last subset .
n is ani fix , but arbitrari number .
suppos i'm given n such object .
we can think about take the union of , the n of a1 union a2 union a3 through u an .
and again , the order in which we do these union doe not matter .
we could simpli write them down in a long stretch of union , a1 union a2 union a3 through union an , without bother to group them with parenthes .
exactli the same thing can be said about intersect .
a1 intersect , a2 intersect , a3 , through intersect an , again without parenthesi , there is no ambigu .
in such set , we will us a gener letter like i or j or k to repres a typic member .
so we'll sai a with a subscript i is a gener , the ith subset in a finit collect .
or perhap even an a countabl infinit collect .
and in thi context , it is complet reason to sai the union of a finit or infinit collect of subset , ai , is just write down the union symbol the , the smile , the cup point upward .
take the union as i vari over a finit or an infinit rang of the a sub i's , and there'll be absolut no ambigu .
thi repres the collect union of a finit or a countabl infin of these set .
similarli for intersect , simpli write down the intersect oper , the frown or a cup point downward .
the intersect over all i , rang over a finit , or a countabl infinit collect , of subset a sub i , just stand for the intersect of all of them .
and again , there is no necess for group parenthes .
okai , of thi kind of simplic in mathemat of cours , make it easier to write your own equat without get stuck with a lot of pettifog detail .
good so far .
now we've through the commut and associ properti of union and intersect .
multipl and addit can be done in ani order .
there's on more properti , and thi is what we call the distribut properti of multipl over addit .
<num> time <num> plu <num> , notic , i'm group <num> plu <num> first , and then multipli it by <num> , we know is the same as <num> time <num> , to which we add <num> time <num> .
multipl we sai , distribut over addit .
and again now , here's a simpl analog when you talk about union and intersect .
sai again we ar deal with three subset , a , b and c of some univers set omega .
form the intersect b with c first .
we know what that mean .
the set of element common to both b and c .
suppos i take the union of that with a third subset a .
the claim is that you get exactli the same set by first take the union of a with b , then take the union of a with c , and intersect them .
it's as if union distribut over intersect .
we could do exactli the same thing by revers the intersect and u , union oper .
and here alreadi is on point of differ between ordinari arithmet .
multipl distribut over addit , but addit patent do not distribut over multipl .
but in the case of set , union distribut , bute over intersect , intersect simultan distribut over union .
the intersect of a with b union c , is the same as ob , the same object , the same set , as obtain by intersect a with b first , then intersect a with c , and take the union of those two .
now , what i've shown you is two oper , union and intersect , which have the familiar featur of ordinari arithmet , addit and multipl .
union gener , loos stand in the role of an addit , intersect stand in the role of a multipl .
veri loos .
these oper have analog to the idea of a zero , and a unit .
in thi case , the empti set , and the univers set .
these oper ar , commut and associ , you can do them in ani order .
these oper distribut on over the other .
now there's thi old adag , if it walk like a duck , if it quack like a duck , it's got to be a duck .
and similarli , if it walk like an algebra , if it quack like an algebra , it's got to be an algebra .
we call thi an algebra of set , and we draw freeli upon the idea of algebra that we ar alreadi acquaint with in ordinari number system .
okai , now here's the first place where we now actual have mani theorem , ident , formula , but these ar basic and import .
we should start with these and , just as in ordinari algebra , the next question then is , well , can i prove deeper result ?
ar there more subtl result which ar not immedi appar that i can us these rule of algebra to discov ?
well of cours , there ar veri , veri mani in the theori of set .
but we'll need just on , okai ?
and these , again , ar familiar to those of you who have taken logic or boolean algebra .
these ar call de morgan's law , all right .
and let me start with the simplest of these set .
let's start with two subset , a and b , of a univers set .
let's start by form the union of a with b , that's a new set , and let them take the complement of that union .
de morgan's law assert that the complement of a union b is the same as the complement of a intersect with the complement of b .
you have a dual statement when union and intersect ar interchang .
if you start by intersect a with b first and then take it complement , that is exactli the same thing as take the complement of a and take it union with the complement of b .
i want to paus to prove these now .
though you should paus and see if you can sketch out , to your satisfact , a proof or a sketch of idea which make thi convinc for you .
draw a pictur .
ask yourself , what is the complement a union b ?
then ask yourself , what is the intersect of a complement with b complement ?
can you convinc yourself you've got the same object ?
do the same thing with union and intersect real fast .
and when you're readi , come back .
well , at thi point i'm go to defer try to show you a proof .
eventu , i'm go to give you ammunit where you can construct a proof for yourself .
thi is simpl , it's not difficult , and you'll be abl to do it quickli .
but let's , veri quickli , expand on thi idea .
the basic idea behind de morgan's law is the follow .
that if you take a union of a bunch of object , and then complement it , it is the same thing as take the intersect of the complement .
similarli , if you take the intersect of a bunch of object and then complement it , that is the same thing as take the union of the complement .
and let's veri quickli provid mathemat notat captur thi intuit .
and we should paus , and again , write it down .
in these express , i am start with a famili of subset a subscript i , i is go to run through a finit rang , perhap <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , till <num> , more gener on through n .
or i could run through a countabl infin , infinit rang .
for exampl , i could run through all the natur number , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , ad infinitum .
or i could run through all integ <num> , <num> , minu <num> , <num> , minu <num> and so forth .
i run through a finit or countabl infinit rang .
and we immedi have analog under de morgan's law for countabl union and countabl intersect as well .
these turn out to be huge import and us .
bear these in mind .
now , we could deriv a varieti of other ident and formula , but these will more than suffic for our purpos .
befor we conclud , i should give you a word on how we can prove ident like thi .
and at the heart of what we ar try to do , is we're try to show that two set ar equal .
and you scratch head and sai thi is ridicul .
if you give me an object , anoth object , can't i tell by just look at it that thei're the same ?
of cours i can , if the object ar finit .
but it get harder if the object ar infinit in term of the number of element in it .
it get harder if the object ar repres in appar veri differ look wai .
and so , it would be us to have it , in hand , a procedur which tell us how we can go ahead and show that two set , two object , ar in fact the same object .
let's start with a subset a and a potenti differ subset b of some univers set .
now , what doe it mean to sai that a is equal to b ?
well , you know , the finit domain , it's easi , right ?
if you have ten object in , in a and ten object in b i can just look at them and sai well these ar the same object like duh .
it's obviou .
but how do you do it if a and b ar infinit ?
i can't just eyebal them , can i ?
i need a more formal procedur .
okai , so what doe it mean to sai thei're equal ?
well if thei're the same , then , there's a two part answer to thi .
reach into the set on your left , call it a .
pick out a jelli bean , an object , an element , a marbl , okai , a number .
thi is someth in a .
if a and b ar realli the same , then ani object here must have a counterpart here which is exactli the same .
so the first part would be to sai , that what need to demonstr , that everi element in a is also in b .
sound veri abstract , right ?
but we will run through a concret set in a moment .
if i can show thi , what have i actual done ?
i've shown that a , in fact , is a subset of b .
so thi is the first part of a demonstr .
show that everi element in a is also in b , a is a subset b .
all right , now i know that a is contain in b .
to show the obviou , we'll settl it .
repeat the stori by sai , well , here's an element from b .
pull it out kick and squeal and sai , well , isn't that in a as well , right ?
if thi frog , in thi collect of frog , is in a .
and it's true for everi frog in the collect of frog which is b , that the collect of frog which is b must be contain in the collect of frog which is a .
b is a subset of a .
if i can show that both a is a subset of b and b is a subset of a , then i've got no room to wiggl .
i've got no place to turn .
it must be the case that a and b ar ident .
okai , in abstract set and infinit set thi is alwai the wai we proce .
we break down equal by first show that everyth on on side is contain in the other , and then show everyth on the other is contain in the first , and togeth we achiev equal .
now thi is veri , veri abstract , all right .
if you haven't seen argument like thi befor , it look weird and sai , oh gee , i didn't get it .
oh , but of cours , that's becaus our intuit is found upon finit element , finit group , where inspect can immedi tell us an obviou answer .
but it get much harder in abstract .
it get much harder when you have infinit collect .
we can't just eyebal thing .
that's why on need a formal procedur like thi .
now , here is a formal procedur for check equal of set .
we can put thi to work immedi in check the valid of ani of the ident or the formula that i've shown you .
all right , let's immedi put thi to case and let's take the test case , the distribut properti of union over intersect .
we claim that the union of a with b intersect c is the same as the , as the intersect of a union b with a union c .
now , how would on show thi ?
well , let's first start by show that everi element , omega on the left hand side , is also in the right hand side .
if that is the case , then the set , which is complic look thing on the left hand side , must be a subset of the set which is on the right .
so let's begin by pick a test element .
suppos omega is an element of the set on the left .
omega is an element of a union b intersect b , c .
you now need to show that thi is also an element of the set on the right .
okai , well what doe it mean to sai that omega is in the union of a with b to section c .
well what doe union mean ?
union is a sort of inclus , right ?
it sort of load thing out , it make thing bigger .
it mean that that omega must be in a or it must be in b intersect c , or possibl of cours , in both .
their union ar not exclus .
all right , now we have too possibl then .
in set like thi , you know , i'm veri fond of an adag of the great hungarian mathematician and educ , georg p lya .
he us to sai , when you have two thing to sai , sai first the first thing , and then the second thing .
and , you look at me and sai , like , duh .
of cours it sound trite and ridicul , but i can tell you what an import and basic principl thi is .
graduat student deal with complic set in scienc or engin ar try to keep someth in mind , whether <num> differ varieti of thing go on .
thei're try to keep everyth in mind simultan and thei go crazi .
thei've forgotten p lya's veri wise adag , when you have mani thing to do , do them on at a time .
when you have two thing to sai , sai the first thing first , then sai the second thing .
all right , in our set , omega is in a , or omega is in b intersect c .
we don't worri about both of them simultan .
let's take them on at a time .
suppos omega is in a , and let's see where thi train of thought goe .
if omega is in a , sinc union is an increas oper , then omega is certainli in a union b , and omega is also in a union c .
if omega is in both a union b and in a union c , then clearli it is there in the intersect of the two .
and therefor , omega is in the intersect of a union b and a intersect a union c .
good , we've establish that in the case omega is in a and omega on the left hand side is also on the right hand side .
what if omega is in b intersect c ?
ok , here's a second possibl .
well , if omega is in b intersect c , then omega must be , by the definit of intersect , both in b and in c .
sinc omega is in b , it is there in a union b .
sinc omega is in c , it is there in a union c .
and therefor , is manifest there in the intersect of a union b and a intersect c .
in both case , an omega on the left is on the right .
and therefor , the set on the left is a subset of the set on the right .
we have conclud the first part in the verif of equal .
we now need to revers the direct and , of cours , the proof is exactli the same .
it follow exactli the same pattern .
and as a saniti check , i will let you work through the step .
mirror what you did on the left , do it on the right .
and verifi now that everi omega , which is on the right , must also be on the left .
in other word , the set on the right is a subset of the set on the left .
and with both part establish , we have nowher to turn .
the two set must in fact be exactli the same .
notic alreadi here in a set like thi , ordinari intuit wa not go to suffic .
we actual need a formal methodolog , a wai of proceed to show that these two object were the same .
and here's a need to manifest for a formal procedur .
of cours , you can us thi to verifi the other distribut properti that intersect distribut over union .
do so .
it will be a valuabl test case of your understand .
and , to burnish your burgeon understand of a method of proof , try the follow .
now go back and try to verifi de morgan's law us thi concret procedur .
when you're readi , come back , and we will summar , what you've done .
let us now summar where we ar .
to summar , we want to deal with collect , set of object .
the underli motiv , of cours , is that in chanc experi we've seen , even in simpl set , that we deal in the aggreg , collect of outcom .
and we need a languag to be abl to describ these aggreg , these collect , these set .
so thi is what we need in our vocabulari .
let's start with the column in the left .
first , what ar the raw item ?
we start with a univers set .
in the theori of chanc , we will shortli call thi the sampl space .
gener , we will repres it by and uppercas greek letter omega .
in practic set , omega will mean differ thing .
for exampl , a set of graph , a set of pair , a set of number , a set of function .
gener , abstractli , it's omega .
element of omega , and shortli we'll be call them sampl point , ar repres by lower case greek letter , in thi case , lower case omega , and there's an idea of membership .
these element ar member of thi univers set , and we have a membership notat .
onc we have a univers set , we can form subcollect , and these lead to subset , and now we have notat and terminolog for subset .
a is a subcollect or subset of omega .
and we have a method of visual these subset , and their relationship with each other and the whole , and thi is through the medium of venn diagram .
now i should not overst thi or oversel thi , venn diagram ar us , but thei ar limit .
thei ar fine when you're deal with on or two or three set , but thei will rapidli becom cumbersom when you have more than three or so , okai .
but thei're still a us , visual mechan to captur some idea of abstract .
now onc you have thi terminolog and notat in , in hand , we go on to the kind of thing we can do with them .
so thi is the second column .
we're talk about basic set oper .
the idea is , how do you construct new set from old set in principl wai ?
the three basic oper ar , union , intersect , complement .
in logic , all , and , and not .
these ar the fundament oper .
with these in hand , you can construct more complex oper .
two more that crop up frequent enough to make it worth rememb ar set differ , a minu b .
bear in mind that thi is not transit , thi is not commut , a minu b and b minu a ar differ .
and the second ar symmetr differ , a triangl b .
the symmetr differ is commut .
okai , it stand for a , a clean up unit as it were , which elimin common element .
these ar the basic oper by which we construct more complex element from simpl element .
and final , where do these oper lead us ?
what kind of true fact , theorem can i discov ?
the kei discoveri is that these oper stand in the role of addit and multipl .
there is an algebra of set .
the empti set stand in the role of an addit zero .
the univers set , the sampl space , stand in the role of a multipl unit .
and onc you have these in place , we can do union and intersect freeli by understand first , that union and intersect can be done in ani order .
these oper ar commut and associ .
and that furthermor , just as in ordinari arithmet , union distribut over intersect and intersect distribut over union .
in other word , we have a distribut properti .
togeth thi describ an algebra of set .
from thi understand we can deriv other deep and interest properti .
and the kei on for us , is that encapsul by de morgan's law , the complement of a union is an intersect of complement , the complement of an intersect , is a union of complement .
we conclud by put togeth a methodolog for veri fine equal .
if we want to show a particular ident is true for set , what we show is that the set on the left is the subset of the set of the right , and simultan , the subset on the right is a further subset of the thing on the left .
togeth thi will establish equal .
now we should go back and rememb a , the notat of the terminolog , b , the basic oper .
you should be abl to write down union , intersect , complement , set differ , symmetr differ without have to look at the definit .
if you need go back and look at a definit , then there's the clear sign that you don't realli understand the definit .
so thi should be hardwir into your understand .
and with these in place , you should rememb the basic oper , the commut and associ oper , the distribut oper , and , veri importantli , de morgan's law .
thi conclud our littl excursu into the theori of set , and set oper .
these will establish an alphabet upon which we can build a theori of chanc .
our next tableau then , will go back to the kind of intuit we built up from our explor of chanc in common place set in tableau three .
and us thi as a spring board to launch us toward the element of an abstract construct of a , an axiomat theori of chanc .
thi wa a theori of chanc discov by andrei kolmogorov , codifi by andrei kolmogorov in <num> .
so our next step , in the next tableau , is to build upon thi intuit , us the languag of set to deduc what we'd want in a theori of chanc , and put togeth such an axiomat theori .
veri abstract i know , but at thi point we're build up notat , terminolog , a languag with which we can talk about interest and deep applic .
we'll follow it up immedi in the follow tableau by go back to a humbl coin toss .
the stori that the marai util a such a naiv argument to comput probabl .
lead him to the mistaken conclus that the two case were equal like , is suspici at best .
the marai , the histor of cultur wa actual quit profici mathemat and technic .
and it's rather unlik that he would have made such specious incorrect argument .
especi on that wa so quickli suscept of a disproof .
the idea that he could discern the differ between the two case becaus of repeat experiment in gambl .
by win a great deal on possibl a and lose a great deal on possibl b , is perhap even more unlik on the face of it .
now thi is go to requir some analysi .
but the student will be will to accept that the possibl ar actual veri close to each other .
both of them have a chanc of veri close to <num> .
in fact , the differ between the two case is about <num> .
now if on were to toss a coin , for exampl .
and we try to determin whether it wa fair .
on , two , three and so forth how mani toss will be requir ?
well , a student would've , could have well imagin that on would need a fair number of tri to get enough data to form an accur estim .
and in thi case , the estim is particularli delic .
we have to do the experi often enough , gambl often enough , to separ two rather close place hypothes .
at <num> . <num> and <num> . <num> .
now , we'll come back to thi thi year , later on , becaus thi is go to be at the heart of mathemat statist .
but it is clear that the number of trial is not go to be someth like <num> .
in <num> trial , would i be abl to separ <num> . <num> from <num> . <num> ?
it seem unlik .
and in fact , the number of trial is go to be someth like the ultra of <num> , <num> trial .
it's veri hard to imagin that some on plai thi game <num> , <num> or <num> , <num> time .
and not onli plai thi came , i can imagin let sai , a smoke fill tavern where peopl ar gambl .
but not just gambl , but in the heat of the moment you're also keep track of everyon of the result of these <num> , <num> gambl or trial .
that sound incred implaus .
but nonetheless it's a good stori .
now we've got an idea of how to begin by analyz a veri simpl game of chanc in a histor context .
what ar the kei element we can abstract from thi ?
well the idea that you have chanc experi where the result ar not a priori determin .
whose result ar outcom .
and so now , there's a idea of try to character complet the possibl outcom of the experi .
and then there ar event of interest to us , which you could identifi with aggreg of outcom .
and final , there's an idea of chanc , a probabl measur .
which quantifi the chanc of a particular aggreg or event happen .
now let's take thi intuit and move on into anoth set where we might have some intuit and in a commonplac set where , which could well be the set for a parlor game .
here is the question .
suppos you have an assemblag of <num> peopl .
what ar the chanc that at least two of them share a common birthdai ?
paus the lectur , think about it , and see if you have an instinct answer .
at thi time , do not do an analysi .
we'll come to that in a moment .
but what do your instinct tell you ?
what is your estim ?
do you think it's like ?
do you think it's unlik ?
now , if i were do thi in front of a real classroom , i could actual do the experi , and i frequent do in class by ask individu student , recit your birthdai and if ani of you have a coincid , let us all know .
but albeit a live audienc in on physic locat , let's do an analysi like so .
thi is a set , and thi is call the birthdai para , paradox .
we built up some intuit in combinatori set where we could model problem us ball and urn .
and thi is anoth problem which is rife , readi for such a , an approach .
let's assembl the individu from left to right , on , two , three up till <num> , okai ?
imagin thei're all seat in front of you .
now , on could do thi problem for <num> individu , but it is much more satisfactori to do it for an arbitrari assemblag of individu .
so , let's imagin that we have an algebra variabl repres a fix but unspecifi number of individu .
natur enough , we will call such an assemblag of size n .
why n ?
becaus , of cours , it is inconceiv that i call an integ anyth els .
long tradit and custom ha inur us to call integ variabl n .
so let us suppos that there ar n individu .
and each individu ha a birthdai spread out through a year .
and let us for definit assum that a year ha got exactli <num> dai .
i know you'll immedi have an object .
you'll sai , oh well , what about leap year ?
oh here's where we come to the crux of model .
ye , in fact , everi four year we hit a leap year .
and now we have <num> dai of the year , and some individu will happen to be born , for exampl , on februari 29th .
but the idea of a leap year in a set of thi size is go to make a veri small chang in variou chanc we calc , calcul .
but it's go to add enorm to the complic we'll have to take care of .
and so , as a first model approach , we make the default assumpt that we do not have leap year , and we just start with a year with <num> dai .
and now we have a set where each individu take on of <num> valu as their birthdai .
natur enough , we'll assum a random sampl from the dai of the year so that each individu's birthdai is equal like to be ani of the <num> dai of the year .
now thi in itself is not strictli accur .
if you look at human popul , especi in the temper region , you'll find that birthdai ar more concentr in certain part of the year for variou climat reason .
but again , thi is a second order effect .
and thi onli get in the wai of understand what is go on .
if , for noth els , if we assum that we have random sampl and that is equal like , we ar go to get a conserv estim for the chanc of a birthdai coincid .
so , let's simplifi further .
we have n individu .
each individu can have on of <num> dai as a birthdai .
and we assum random sampl where everi birthdai is a priori assum to have equal probabl .
an outcom of thi experi is a string of n digit .
and thi sequenc of n digit repres dai of the year .
each on is on of <num> dai .
if we think of the individu as ball , the dai of the year as urn , what we're specifi is an order sampl of size n drawn from <num> distinguish urn .
and , of cours , by the basic principl of count , we know that the number of differ sequenc for birthdai we can get is <num> to the power n .
thi is sampl with replac .
the dai could in principl repeat .
out of these <num> to the power of n possibl , which possibl result in birthdai coincid ?
as in de mere's dice problem , what if we consid the obvers of thi event , the complement of thi event , which is the event that no two birthdai's coincid .
if that is the case , then we ar provid as an outcom a string of n digit , each on take valu between , sai , <num> and <num> , with the properti that no two digit can be the same .
but thi then correspond to an order sampl of size n drawn from a popul of size <num> , the dai of the year , where sampl is without replac .
and again , an elementari principl of count tell us that there ar precis <num> to the n fall possibl for such a sequenc .
rememb the fall factori notat .
<num> to the n fall stand for a product of n term start at <num> with each succeed term on less than the previou term .
good , and now for the chanc of not get a coincid in birthdai , should be <num> to the n fall divid by <num> to the n becaus natur , we ar assum random sampl , all dai of the year be equal like .
the chanc , therefor , that there is a coincid that two or more birthdai coincid should be <num> minu thi ratio , <num> minu <num> to the n fall divid by <num> to the n .
of cours , thi onli depend on the number of peopl in the assemblag .
let's identifi that , give it a name , call it littl p of n , the probabl that an n individu will find a coincid of birthdai .
of cours , thi vari within .
so we , we could veri quickli see what thi behav like by tabul repres valu .
and here's what i provid for you .
so let's sai n run from <num> and <num> , <num> , <num> , and so on up .
and that is in the first column .
and the second column tell you what the valu p of n comput to be .
the row highlight in red is the problem we start with , when we had <num> individu .
and we find that the <num> individu , alreadi the chanc of have a birthdai coincid is <num> or actual slightli more than <num> .
mani peopl find thi veri surpris , right ?
thi is why it's call the birthdai paradox .
in fact , if you look at assemblag of just <num> peopl , the odd ar now about <num> that there will be a coincid of birthdai .
okai .
now let's see what we can draw from thi so far .
our chanc experi have had a finit number of possibl , albeit possibl a veri larg number , that we're go to sampl from these possibl randomli .
mean , uniformli with equal chanc for everi possibl .
outcom , then ar on of these possibl .
event ar aggreg of outcom and attach to everi event is a chanc or a number , a probabl measur .
the two exampl i've given you have been particularli suscept of a ball and urn model mindset .
we can now us thi and us thi kind of model framework in a varieti of combinatori set where we have random sampl .
so let me start by give you a more abstract version , like a simpl abstract version of thi problem for you to muse on .
suppos on ha two ball .
call them sai , a and b .
and on place them randomli in three urn , call them on , two and three .
what ar the chanc that the middl urn , the central urn is occupi ?
paus the lectur and sai , if we can built up to an answer .
okai .
now that you're back , let's see how you did .
so thi is the set .
it's a gener ball and urn problem .
and in thi case , of cours , there is no verbal camouflag around the ball or the urn .
right ?
we're not talk about dice or peopl or birthdai or the face of the die .
now , i have to sai we alreadi model it and now we have two ball .
thei could , for exampl , be two dice or two anyth whatsoev , two peopl .
now we're go to place the ball in three urn and now we need a model for it .
a clean mathemat wai of view the experi .
now , if you've done what is depict on the right of your screen , then that'll be complet conson with the kind of terminolog and notat , the wai we view our first two experi .
so for exampl , we could sai , well , there ar three urn .
let's call them on , two and three and let's then give an order pair of valu .
the first valu tell you where the first ball went , which urn it wa place in .
the second valu tell you where the second ball goe .
so now we have an order pair where sampl is with replac from three urn .
and therefor , you have <num> to the power <num> or <num> possibl for the pair of ball .
now in thi set , you can sai , well , ar there other wai of view the problem ?
and of cours , we could view it much more graphic .
and thi is illustr on the left .
for exampl , sai you have ball a and b .
physic , show the urn at locat here , here and here .
on , two and three .
and simpli place the ball in these locat in variou order .
now onc you of cours do thi systemat , lexicograph .
so , on could for instanc .
first , identifi all possibl where both ball go to a common urn .
both go into the first urn .
both go into the second urn .
both go into the third urn .
and then identifi systemat , possibl where you have each ball in a distinct urn .
and you could do thi , for exampl , by first identifi all the case where the first urn is occupi .
so either the first ball goe in there , a goe in there and then b goe in on of the remain two place .
or b goe in the first urn and then a goe in on of the two remain place .
thi elimin all possibl where the first urn is occupi .
now we elimin possibl where the first urn is unoccupi and the second urn is occupi , which mean either a is in the second urn or b is in the second urn .
which mean the remain ball must be the third urn and we've got all the possibl and again there ar nine .
all road to lead to room , right ?
there ar mani notat on could adopt , which could describ the underli problem .
of cours , it is import to pick a notat which is compact , which is not overli cumbersom and complex .
in that case , either of these two would serv .
what is the event of interest to us ?
well , the abstract event shown of ani particular color is simpli that the second urn is occupi .
if you pick a numer pair wise represent of the outcom , thi mean that you've got a pair of number where on or both of the pair take the valu two .
and you identifi there ar five possibl and you write them down .
if you take the more visual notat on the left , then we simpli identifi urn where the middl urn is not empti .
and again , there ar five possibl .
all road do in fact , lead to room .
we assum that we have random select , so all outcom ar equal like .
and therefor , the chanc that the second urn is occupi is exactli five in nine .
okai .
let's summar and see what the kei idea ar that we have extract from these three simpl combinatori experi .
so , here's a summari .
chanc in commonplac set where sampl is from finit set .
and in such set , the idea of ball and urn give us a potent metaphor .
so , we're begin with a combinatori set .
well , what is a combinatori set ?
implicit here is the idea that all chanc ar equal like .
all outcom ar equal like .
thi is the heart of random sampl .
we have a chanc experi , which ha outcom which rang across a finit collect of possibl outcom .
thi finit number could be veri larg , but it is bound .
it is a finit set , sometim call a univers set , and in thi context invari repres by the uppercas greek letter omega .
so , uppercas omega alwai repres for us the space of all possibl for the chanc experi at hand .
it is a set or collect of all possibl conceiv outcom of the experi .
now , what is import here is not that we've actual done the experi .
but it is import that we be abl to conceiv of do it .
and thi is the heart of the model , a conceptu experi , a thought experi , or in the german , a gedanken experi , okai .
and omega then repres all possibl conceiv outcom in such a set .
the next step is to identifi event of interest .
and an event is alwai repres by an aggreg or a subcollect of the possibl out exper , outcom in the experi .
from a notat point of view , it will be good to give event simpl small compact name .
and by reason of tradit , we will call event by uppercas letter at the low end of the alphabet .
so for exampl , uppercas a or b or c or d could all repres event of interest in a particular chanc set .
and final , we're interest in a probabl measur .
our probabl measur then ha to ascrib a notion of chanc .
veri vagu , we'll keep in mind that the idea of chanc mean that if we do the experi mani , mani time , then a certain event occur a certain fraction of the time .
thi is the idea we want to ascrib to chanc .
of cours , we want to formal thi .
some colloqui notat is us in describ these , thi set .
so for exampl , colloqui , we will sai that an outcom is favor for an event if it is in the aggreg of outcom which compris that event .
and so colloqui , we'll imagin that if we do an experi and an outcom in an event occur , an outcom favor for the event occur , then we will sai that event occur .
and so , now our idea of chanc in a combinatori set is veri clear .
the chanc or the probabl we want to ascrib an event in notat , a bold font upper case p for probabl with an argument , the argument be the event of interest to us , a collect of outcom .
in a combinatori set where the outcom ar equal like , the probabl of the event is veri simpli the number of outcom which ar favor to the event at hand .
in other word , the size of that set divid by the total number of possibl .
now , and in notat , we can captur all of thi veri cleanli and simpli .
p of a , the probabl of the event a in word is the number of outcom favor for a divid by the total number of possibl outcom .
even more compactli , we can sai thi is the cardin of a divid by the cardin of omega .
card or cardin repres the size of the underli set .
now , thi alreadi give us a start point .
chanc experi ar characteris at thi level by outcom , event and probabl measur .
now , our set so far ha consid a simplist view where we have a finit number of possibl outcom , and everyth is equal like .
in other word , we have a combinatori set .
our next step is to relax these constraint , move awai from the straitjacket .
what if chanc ar not equal like ?
what if a die is load ?
what if the coin is unfair ?
and we're on step further beyond that and at least envisag set where we have chanc experi , where the number of possibl outcom is not finit anymor .
the number of possibl outcom is infinit .
now , of cours , the moment you have an infinit number of outcom , thei cannot all becom equal like .
how should on handl thi ?
is there ani worth in handl thi ?
and so , we want to build a theori which allow us to expand into real life set , into problem of heft and import .
and so , we'll want to consid thi next .
now , befor we do thi , i will want to take a detour through a tableau where the ball and urn model we ar look at , which implicitli kept in mind distinguish ball and distinguish urn ar relax .
what if instead of have two distinguish ball , a red die and a white die ?
what if we had two ball which were indistinguish ?
what now ?
how doe the game chang ?
i will illustr thi in a set of interest in it own right , in a set of statist mechan and in the turmoil of the earli part of the 20th centuri , when quantum mechan wa take center stage .
and the stori is interest in it own right and give us actual result which seem to fit real model of real particl veri , veri well .
thi is a danger bend section , and you should glanc at it advisedli .
if you're interest , if you're curiou , by all mean look at the next tableau .
if not , it can jump ahead to the follow tableau , where we relax the idea of chanc in combinatori set to take in the idea of chanc where the probabl ar unequ and the space is possibl infinit .
tableau three , part two , urn model in statist physic .
the casual listen might find thi a strang juxtaposit .
commonplac problem , on the on hand , and the strang world of statist physic on the other .
but of cours , in the 21st centuri , we've come to casual familiar with strang object , denizen from the world of physic , which appear in the popular literatur , in the popular press .
now , in the previou tableau , we conclud with a view of how simpl ball and urn model , appear in commonplac problem involv the throw of a die , or the repeat toss of a coin .
in todai's lectur , we shall see how small varianc on thi urn theme appli to veri fundament and deep problem in physic .
thi is a danger bend lectur .
and the reader who is anxiou to get on with the re gesta , to the main cours as it where , could skip thi tableau and move onto the next part without ani loss of continu .
but , for the reader who's curiou about modern dai physic and the rule chanc plai in it , listen on .
there ar few place in modern life where we see such larg assemblag of particl as in particl physic .
in the 19th centuri , physic wa view veri mechanist .
there were determin law which had been given to us by newton , and physic system invari follow those law .
but late in the 19th centuri , with a grow evid for particul behavior , there wa a , a stream of thought which creat a statist or a probabilist understand of how physic particl behav .
the spearhead for thi kind of idea wa ludwig walsman , who on the end of the 19th centuri , postul a theori of statist mechan .
thi wa not wide accept .
but , thi wa the begin of a theori which inform much of 20th centuri physic .
now in thi world we find that there ar particl , a larg number of them , mill around without a priori determin outcom .
how doe on describ such a world ?
what is an appropri model ?
of cours todai , the listen would have encount strang and exot particl of all kind .
perhap meson , gluon , the weak and the strong nuclear forc , photon .
the hig goe on .
now , these particl appear in variou strang form , in exot color , for exampl , the fundament quark , which appear in mani flavor up and down , strang , charm .
all these led color to a rather complic stori .
but of cours , if on look at thi in full gener , as it were , it becom extraordinarili hard to model .
now , remark , at the heart of all of these appar complex and divers kind of particular behavior , ar veri , veri , veri simpl chanc model , involv variat on a theme on ball and urn .
so , let us get to the heart of the problem , and describ , shown of all physic color , what the essenti mathemat problem is .
so we begin with an assemblag , and in your mind , you should think of a veri larg assemblag , of a larg number of particl .
inevit , we call them n in number .
these particl come equip with certain characterist .
what ar call the state of the particl .
for exampl , where thei're locat , their physic posit , perhap the momentum , their spin .
these characterist describ the state of the particl .
for deafed , think about thi as , let's sai , a physic posit .
though it could be more complex than that .
on of the great discoveri in earli 20th centuri physic wa that these fundament attribut of particl were quantiz , thei were discret , a finit in number .
which meant that particl occupi onli a finit number of state .
and inevit in our context , we think of those state as urn , receptacl , that particl could land in .
and so now we have the begin of an unfold pictur .
a larg number of particl in and a set of urn , state to which thei could belong , thei could be assign .
and now we have a ball and urn problem .
now what is chanc driven here ?
and thi wa boltzmann's insight .
perhap the best wai to think about assemblag of particl like these is to imagin that thei ar distribut in the state in the urn at random .
we have the begin of a chanc driven phenomenon .
the moment you distribut particl , ball in these urn .
now what is materi ?
what is salient ?
is which urn ar occupi and how mani ball ar in those urn ?
how mani of those particl share a particular characterist ?
thi lead the idea of an occup number .
so , the wai you ar go to think about thi is as follow .
imagin that we list the urn from left to right on , two , three , four , five up through r .
these ar a possibl state of your physic system .
distribut the ball in these urn by some random mechan .
and then simpli count how mani ball ar in the first urn ?
well , we need to give is a name , a number , thi is the essenti purpos of notat .
let's call them k1 ball in the first urn .
and then there ar certain number of ball in the second urn .
how mani ?
well , inevit , k2 in number k3 in the third urn and sai k sub r in the rth urn .
these number k repres the occup of these urn .
of cours occup number must be non neg .
you clearli can't have a neg occup in an urn and thei must add up to the total number of ball in the system , the total number of particl .
good .
now , here is the million dollar question .
you've got a chanc distribut of these ball and occup configur is a sequenc of r occup .
the occup of each of these urn , and occup configur could be realiz by mani differ design of ball to urn .
for exampl , if the first urn ha got two ball , it could have the third and the seventh ball , or the millionth and the billionth ball .
as far as occup is concern , it doe not matter which .
and so an occup configur is an aggreg of possibl outcom .
it is an event .
a chanc event in thi chanc driven problem .
and the moment we have a chanc event , a natur question , the inevit question is , what ar the chanc ?
so , given a random placement of n ball , n particl into r urn , r state and given a particular occup configur of interest to us , sai a particular sequenc k1 , k2 , k3 through k sub r .
what ar the chanc ?
what is the probabl p of k1 through kr that you observ that particular occup configur ?
thi particular problem is at the heart of statist physic .
we shall approach thi from a histor context in three syllabu .
which will start with a classic descript or model and then work out what we have to do to modifi it to fit the fact .
and that'll lead us to the two modern version of thi occup problem .
we begin our analysi with the classic model for particul descript .
it ha got two famou name attach to it .
jame clerk maxwel wa perhap , the greatest physicist , mathematician of the 19th centuri .
in mani wai , you can think of maxwel as the connector between newton , on the on hand , and einstein on the other .
maxwel's perhap most famous rememb for be the father of electromagnet theori in hi epoch public in <num> , of the wai electromagnet forc interact .
these ar now call maxwel's equat .
but maxwel had wide other interest , as well .
in particular , he contribut to thi classic theori of how particl were distribut .
maxwel i'll sai , wa a dilettant in mani other area .
he famous , wa the first person to examin the ring of saturn , and conclud that the ring must be made of up of mani , mani , mani tini bodi , and were not just solid ring .
he wa also a poet , and he publish famous in victorian light vers , but we digress .
hi collabor in these idea wa veri differ in person from maxwel .
thi wa ludwig boltzmann .
wa famous attach to the idea of an articul of a , the statist natur of the second law of thermodynam that disord entropi increas .
boltzmann , toward the end of the 19th centuri , push an atom view of physic .
thi wa not popular at that time .
but the idea is he wa propos , like maxwel , propos a statist distribut of atom to explain physic phenomena .
boltzmann , sadli , took hi own life in <num> .
he wa an intens man , suffer bout of depress , and sadli he di just a few year befor hi theori were dramat confirm .
in experi done by j . b .
parr in pari to measur avogadro's number .
but the main thrust of the maxwel boltzmann idea wa essenti , combinatori .
and so , here's the set .
recal we have a set , where we have n ball .
in thi case i've shown you <num> ball , and our urn for definit , let us consid <num> urn .
and now i've dispens with the idea of a physic urn as an object , which can receiv ball , again from a pure metaphor point of view .
all that matter ar these object which ar call ball , which i'm go to distribut into these receptacl that i shall call urn .
so now i have <num> ball and <num> urn .
now , suppos on is intrit , interest in a particular occup configur .
in annot <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> .
now , what doe thi mean ?
it mean , we ar look for distribut of these ball into these urn in such a fashion that the first urn collect <num> ball .
the second urn collect two ball , the third urn is empti , and the fourth urn contain the remain ball , six in number .
okai , here's an occup configur .
in how mani wai can thi be done ?
okai , let's paus for a moment , and think about thi .
in a set like thi , it is conveni to begin by ask what is the first step in the process ?
and the first step is well , we want to distribut <num> ball into the first urn .
let's go ahead and do thi .
now here is a particular distribut of four ball into the the first urn .
but thi could assuredli be done in mani , mani differ wai .
how mani wai ?
well , there ar <num> ball , and you've gotta choos ani <num> , so there ar <num> choos <num> wai of distribut <num> ball into the first urn .
with the <num> ball in the first urn , we now turn attent to the occup of the second urn .
<num> ball have to go there but <num> ball have alreadi been remov from the pool .
so we have <num> minu <num> , or <num> ball left of those <num> go into the second urn .
how mani wai can thi be done ?
well , eight choos two wai , or in a more clear wai <num> minu <num> choos <num> wai .
excel , now at thi point we've remov six ball from the popul .
we have <num> minu six ball left , or six ball left , of those , none go into the third urn .
of cours , there's onli on wai to do thi .
noth goe in there .
but to identifi thi logic , what we ar sai is that we have <num> minu six , or six ball .
and none go into the third urn , thi can be done in six , two's , zero valu .
and now we come to the last urn .
at thi point we have six ball residu , and all of them go into the last urn .
thi can be done of cours , in onli on wai , or spell it out in <num> , <num> , <num> wai which is exactli on .
good .
and now we observ we've got thi flock of covei of binomi coeffici flutter onto the screen .
and the moment you write thi down oh , it doe look formid doesn't it .
but of cours , natur we will want to try to simplifi thi .
and so we begin by write down explicitli , what each of these binomi coeffici realli is ?
paus and do thi .
good .
now you've written down what these binomi coeffici mean , and now we've got a long string of ratio of factori .
it doe look intimid but paus , take a good look at what you've written down .
do you see ani pattern ?
of cours , you do .
you realiz that term cancel in numer , and denomin .
an eight factori cancel the numer and denomin , and two pair of six factori also cancel .
which mean the express simplifi .
recal that zero factori is on so the last zero factori i'm go to replac by on .
and now i've got an express , which is too larg , but it clarifi .
the express ha the factori of the number of ball in the numer , and in the denomin a product of the factori of the occup number .
it couldn't get much simpler , could it ?
now that we've built a right understand of a simpl implement of the schema .
let's properli gener , and come up with what an express should be in the abstract set .
where we have n ball , and r urn .
and the process will be exactli , eh , as we saw in thi exampl .
if we start with n ball of those k1 go into the first urn .
how mani wai can thi be done ?
of cours , n chose k1 wai .
the moment k1 ball have been place in the first urn .
now , there ar n minu k1 ball remain .
of those , k2 have to go to the second urn .
and that's thi can be done in n minu k1 , choos k2 wai .
at thi point , we have n minu k1 minu k2 ball left .
of those , k3 have to go the third urn , and to proceed in thi fashion .
by the time we get to the last urn , from the number of ball , we've taken awai the sum of the first r minu on occup number .
of cours , if you think about it , you'll realiz thi just mean you have k sub r ball left .
and thei all have to go to the last urn .
thi can be done exactli on wai , which is the last big binomi coeffici on the screen .
well , a long express , the next step of cours , is to try to simplifi it .
so , we write down explicitli , what each of these binomi coeffici is ?
paus , and write them down .
as befor , you observ that factori cancel , on after the other , in numer and denomin .
and the entir express simplifi beautifulli , again .
to <num> , where you have a ratio .
the factori of the number of ball in the numer , and in the denomin , a product of the factori of the occup number .
it couldn't get much simpler .
here now is the express for the number of differ wai .
in which a distribut of n ball into r urn could engend a given occup configur k1 through kr .
the question of cours , now is how mani wai can i distribut the ball in the urn in the first place ?
oh , but thi is easi .
if i think of arrang the ball from left to right , ball on , ball two , ball three , ball <num> , ball n , and identifi , which urn each ball went into .
then we have on particular distribut of the ball , and the urn .
but thi mean that we have an order sampl of size n .
select from the urn where the sampl is with replac multipl ball can occupi an urn ?
of cours , we know the answer to thi .
it is inevit r to the power n .
and now we've got a complet stori .
okai , and thi is the classic model for the distribut of ball into urn , classic particl into state .
and these lead to what ar now call the maxwel boltzmann statist , name after jame clark maxwel and ludwig boltzmann .
the chanc that in a random deploy of n ball into r urn , the probabl that particular occup configur , k1 through kr , is seen , is given by the ratio of the number of wai in which thi occup configur could be realiz , divid by the total number of wai of distribut ball in r urn .
of cours , bare in mind here that these occup number must be non neg and thei must add to the total number of particl in the system .
now thi look beauti , eleg , and a complet stori of how particl in natur might distribut across state .
there's just on small fly in the ointment , and it is thi .
investig in the earli part of the 20th centuri show that there ar no known physic particl which satisfi thi complet natur distribut .
let me repeat that again .
there ar no known physic particl which obei thi complet natur physic distribut .
thi is remark .
the probabilist william feller wryli remark that appar , particl in natur do not come equip with human common sens .
what could have gone wrong ?
the model is superbl correct .
i mean , you take a bunch of particl .
you can throw them out , and thei distribut randomli .
and the count is inevit given by the maxwel boltzmann formula on your screen .
why on earth do particl not obei thi complet , obvious correct descript ?
thi point out the peril in appli clean idea , idea which appear to have a logic immediaci , a correct .
and assum , make the leap to believ that natur must , in fact , conform to our idea of mathemat cleanli .
in thi case , natur at the quantum particul level , appar doe not like thi wai of common sens .
and by the earli part of the 20th centuri , it becam clear that thi classic idea wa ship water .
it could not hold , as a descript of realiti that is be examin .
someth new had to take it place .
thi will be the content of our next sliver side , all right .
i should not let it go howev , by imagin that thi idea of maxwel boltzmann wa should just be immedi confin to the nearest trash can .
these idea had enorm impact .
and in the realm of the descript of a macroscop view of gass of the world , thei have enorm accuraci .
where thi kind of descript falter is at the individu quantum mechan , particul level .
there particl behav in strang and wondrou wai , and we shall come to that next .
i should reiter that while the maxwel boltzmann statist don't appar fit ani known particl , the theori is vibrant and rich .
it ha contribut to a rich , robust theori , a kinet theori of gass .
it ha given mean and a deep insight into the feel , the phenomenon , of temperatur .
so thi is actual a huge advanc in physic as a whole .
but at the particul level , at the quantum mechan level , it appar doe not hold as advertis .
the next step in the understand of where to go from here wa provid by two other luminari , giant of the 20th centuri .
the first , satyendra nath bose , wa an indian physicist .
the second , einstein , well , wa einstein .
bose propos a wai of view assemblag of photon , quantiz particl of light , and figur out what the assemblag would do .
the theori that he propos wa not immedi popular .
in fact it wa reject at the first gener he sent it to .
but thei found support with the redoubt einstein .
einstein realiz that bose's idea could also hold or appli to assemblag of larger element like atom .
and togeth , thei publish a sequenc of paper start in <num> .
these paper articul a model for certain physic particl .
now , what wa the kei insight ?
well , let's go back to our toi exampl to see what bose and einstein descend in the physic world .
so the set is thi .
we ar think about the random placement of a certain number of ball n in the exampl n is <num> , into a certain number of urn r and in our exampl r is <num> .
the question , the thought that came across bose's mind wa the follow .
what if the ball ar not distinguish ?
hm , thi is strang .
we don't quit have an easi analog of thi in our practic experi .
for exampl , imagin toss a coin twice .
well , natur , i know what the first toss wa and what the second toss wa .
the experi is equival to take a pair of coin and toss them .
of cours , i know thi coin is separ from thi coin .
and therefor , for that experi , the possibl outcom ar for a number , label for exampl the coin on your right as coin <num> , the coin on your left as coin <num> .
you have head , head tail , tail tail , and tail head .
but in bose's view , if the coin were indistinguish , then you could not discern a head and a tail from a tail and a head .
so in thi view , you onli have three possibl outcom .
a head , head , a head and a tail , and a tail , tail .
it's as if you have a triangl of outcom an your experi is give you on side of the triangl at random .
oh , thi is strang , okai how do we grappl around thi and in particular how do we figur out .
occup configur in thi kind of non intuit set .
well , we adopt as a guid principl the sage advic of the hungarian mathematician georg polya .
who opin that in complex problem , we could do wors than ask the follow veri , veri simpl question .
what is the simplest version of the problem that i do not yet know how to solv ?
of cours , in thi case , i've got too mani ball or too mani urn .
and so i'd want to reduc the number of ball and the number of urn to see if i can discern essenti featur .
well , how mani ball should i have ?
well , on ball , well that is trivial so mayb perhap i should start with two ball .
and how mani urn ?
well , on or two urn appear trivial , so perhap we should start with three urn .
and so , we have a sanit , simpler set .
two indistinguish , indistinguish ball and three urn .
and now i want to distribut these ball in these urn .
of cours , thi problem is now easi to handl .
let's go about strip it of it purest structur , which is not essenti to the logic heart of the problem .
what is import about the urn ?
is it import that i actual give you a , an urn ?
no , that doesn't seem to be critic to the problem ?
it's our attach view of , let's sai , cell , rectangular in form , ar quit suffici .
all i need is a place to put ball .
is it import that i have floor and ceil for these cell ?
well , even that is not import .
all i need to know .
is which urn is which .
and so , imagin the follow wai of set up the problem .
stack up your urn from left to right .
while at the left end you have a wall , thi is the edg of your first end .
at the right end , you have a wall .
thi is the edg of your last urn .
in between we have wall , separ , or stick .
and these stick serv to separ on urn from the other .
and now what do we do ?
we toss the ball into the urn .
the exampl i've shown you is where the first urn is empti , the second urn ha a ball , the third urn ha on ball .
and so , we ar look at the occup configur , zero , on , on .
in thi model of bose and einstein it make littl matter .
whether the first ball ha gone into urn two or into urn three .
all that it matter is that the urn two and three ar occupi each with on ball .
the moment i understand thi , now i can start write out all possibl .
i'll paus for a moment and let you plai with thi and see whether you can write down all the possibl configur that could result .
now , we've had a chanc to plai with it .
did you come up with a represent like thi ?
well , what have we done here ?
the simplest wai to do thi and the most effici wai is to be veri systemat in the wai you go about assign ball to urn .
in other word , do it in a lexicograph fashion ?
on wai of think about the assign is as follow , we have two ball .
on possibl is that both ball go into on urn .
now if that is the case we have the situat that is seen on your left .
you have urn , <num> be occupi with <num> ball with occup configur <num> , <num> , <num> .
or urn <num> with <num> ball occup configur <num> , <num> , <num> .
or urn <num> with <num> ball , occup configur , <num> , <num> , <num> .
now we've exhaust all possibl for both ball go into a common urn .
we can now turn our attent to those case where no urn ha a doubl occup .
but in thi case we can start by sai well , what ar those case where the first urn ha singl occup ?
in which case , the remain ball ha to go to either urn <num> or <num> .
lead to the occup number <num> , <num> , <num> and <num> , <num> , <num> respect .
at thi point we've exhaust all possibl for singl occup or doubl occup of the first urn .
which mean the first urn can now onli be empti as a last remain case .
but now sinc doubl occup is forbidden , that bring us back to the exampl we start with , the occup <num> , <num> , <num> .
and now it is clear there ar no other case , and so these , thi is the univers of possibl .
now we want to extract from thi simpl exampl kei featur which can gener to arbitrari structur .
so let's take a hard look at what these imag ar tell us .
at the end i've got these urn boundari .
thei ar fix .
now the urn themselv ar metaphor end , and rememb thei ar infinit distens .
an urn can contain as mani ball as you wish .
right ?
and i denot thi in the figur on your left by show urn which ar big enough to accommod <num> ball .
so i just move the barrier to make sure i could put <num> ball in .
good .
now if i look from left to right on your screen , what do you see ?
i see that i have a success of ball and urn barrier .
let's rephras thi .
the ball look like stone .
the urn barrier , the separ , look like stick , or if you like , 0s and 1s .
i've got a string of stick and stone in some order .
each of the case give me a distinct arrang of stick and stone , 1s and 0s .
what appear to matter ar the posit that ar avail .
how mani posit do i have ?
well , i've got <num> ball , <num> stone .
and how mani stick ?
well , there ar <num> urn and therefor the separ ar <num> minu <num> , or <num> in number .
so i have <num> stick , <num> ball , <num> locat .
and our <num> possibl have cover all wai of distribut those <num> ball into those <num> locat .
okai , thi is our kei insight , all right ?
let's captur everyth togeth .
we've reduc the problem of distribut our <num> ball into our <num> urn into the follow consider .
there ar <num> ident stone , ball , which ar indistinguish .
there ar <num> minu <num> , or <num> stick which connot cell barrier , urn wall , or separ .
togeth , i have between the stick and the stone , <num> plu <num> , or <num> locat .
and of those <num> locat , i have to specifi which <num> the stick land in , and which <num> the stone land in .
there ar exactli <num> choos <num> wai of specifi .
for exampl , which locat ar occupi by the stone ?
and of cours , the remain locat must be occupi by the stick .
onc we understand thi kei principl , the gener is veri , veri clear .
and we immedi write down the gener answer .
so now let's suppos we start with n indistinguish ball and r urn .
arrang the urn from left to right .
fix the end point .
how mani separ ?
how mani stick do i have ?
<num> less than the number of urn , r minu <num> .
how mani stone do i have ?
well , it's the number of ball , n .
how mani locat do i have to distribut my stick and my stone ?
n plu r minu <num> .
of these locat , you have to specifi which n ar taken by the ball .
the remain on , of cours , ar taken by the stick , the urn boundari .
and of cours , you have a binomi coeffici , n plu r minu <num> choos n .
we now have a complet descript of the number of wai in we can distribut n indistinguish ball into r urn .
we now put everyth togeth .
there is no reason to believ that ani on distribut is ani more like than ani other .
so we make an actual assumpt that these configur , these distribut ar all equal like .
so now we have n plu r minu <num> choos n possibl wai of creat these occup configur .
the chosen occup configur k1 through kr is on of them .
and therefor , the chanc of observ that particular occup configur is a reciproc of n plu r minu <num> choos n .
bear in mind again that these occup number ar not neg , and thei must inevit add up to the number of ball in the system .
the kei here is that the ball ar indistinguish .
now , thi is theori , thi is nice .
thi wa publish in <num> , by bose , and by einstein .
but , is it real ?
okai .
what is the worth of such a theori ?
of cours , the essenti worth of a theori is in it fit to observ realiti .
and in thi , thi model turn out to be huge success .
a wide rang of elementari particl , and composit particl , follow thi law , articul by bose and einstein .
these particl ar call boson , in honor of satyendra nath bose .
the nomenclatur wa , wa creat by paul dirac .
and boson , for those of who know a littl physic , ar particl which have integ spin , right ?
for the rest of us , what doe thi mean ?
well there's a wide rang of elementari particl which fit thi model , right .
common exampl ar photon , the carrier of light .
the gaug boson , which ar the carrier of forc .
these includ the gluon , which mediat the strong nuclear forc , and the w and z boson , which mediat what is call the weak nuclear forc .
these ar forc carri particl .
the higg boson .
thi wa a particl which wa sportul , around the middl of the 1960s , to be the particl which confer mass as we observ it , 'kai .
the exist of thi particl is kei for 20th centuri physic to work as advertis .
and ever sinc it wa postul in the 1960s , a massiv particl hunt wa underwai to try to determin whether thi particl actual exist .
and remark in <num> , the larg hadron collid in geneva in switzerland physicist announc that , that thei had discov thi elus particl , the higg boson .
becaus of the fundament natur thi particl , sometim call the god particl .
all these ar exampl of boson , fundament particl which obei the bose einstein statist law .
einstein observ that thi kind of law also appli to composit particl , larger particl .
for exampl , thing like the helium for isotop .
and the carbon <num> atom .
these ar exampl of larger structur , larger particl , which obei thi basic law .
at the heart , the particl call boson have thi principl in mind .
thei ar repres by indistinguish particl distribut in a non interact fashion across possibl mani urn .
you discern thi kind of statist phenomena at the particul , or the quantum level .
now a kei element here is that these particl ar non interact .
photon , for exampl , don't realli interact with each other .
and , there ar these particl can comfort occupi the same urn .
thei ar not snobbish or exclus , so mani particl could land in on urn .
now , thi led einstein to conjectur in <num> that you could have a state of natur .
veri , veri strang state of natur where if you cool the system down to close to absolut zero , that boson could end up fall into a state which wa as comatos as possibl , as still as possibl for a quantum mechan pa , particl .
now , no quantum mechan particl is absolut still .
it's got littl twitch and it move , it move , eh .
that's the natur of the beast , okai .
thi is on of the strang featur of a quantum mechan view of the world .
that there's random everywher .
there's twitchi everywher .
but if you try to elimin a twitchy as much as possibl , close to absolut zero .
then einstein realiz that thi kind of mortal gave rise to thi new form of matter , someth that todai we call a bose einstein condens .
where the particl at the quantum level all sit togeth and form a stew where macroscop thi , thi soup will exhibit quantum kind of behavior .
now thi is where the worth of a theori come into evid .
it make predict .
could thi actual be realiz .
well the hunt from <num> took <num> long year , <num> to be precis .
but in <num> physicist california construct a bose einstein condens us rubidium atom cool to near absolut zero .
thi wa a triumphant vindic of the theori which had been a centuri in the make .
and sinc then , other bose einstein condens have been construct and observ , as late as the year <num> .
a bose einstein condens of photon , the fabric of light , wa construct .
thi is a marvel stori .
okai ?
and it actual end up in a nobel prize win stori for these discoveri .
but it is not a complet stori .
just a coupl of year after bose and einstein publish their paper , physicist realiz that these phenomena describ by the bose einstein statist don't appli to certain other common particl .
thi will be the next part and the final part of our stori .
tableau <num> .
toward an axiomat theori of probabl the abstract probabl space .
have explor chanc in commonplac set to build intuit and have gone through and review the languag of set theori with a view to give us an alphabet , we have now come to the point where we can build a formal mathemat foundat for the subject .
thi is veri much in the wai that in euclidean geometri , peopl built upon the intuit for geometr concept from antiqu .
and about <num> million year ago , a scribe in alexandria put forth a formal axiomat foundat for the subject .
and thi of cours revolution the world .
thi wa euclidean geometri .
the foundat for probabl should follow a similar approach .
but , remark for a subject of such antiqu , the formal foundat were onli laid less than a centuri ago , in the earli part of the 20th centuri .
so , let us begin with our understand of idea that we have glean from chanc in ordinari set , to see what should go into the foundat of the subject .
so , to begin , each of the experi we look at had three featur .
there wa an idea that when you perform a chanc experi , there is an outcom , and the outcom togeth compris a famili of conceiv outcom .
second , there wa the idea of an event of interest .
and we identifi event with aggreg , collect of outcom .
and final , there wa a process of ascrib a chanc to an event , a collect of outcom .
in the formal theori , each of these element ha a formal counterpart .
the collect of outcom is call the sampl space .
the famili of event ar call the famili of measur set .
and final , the concept of chanc is codifi in the provis of a probabl measur .
in the usual nomenclatur , we give some notat name to these object .
the sampl space is gener repres by the uppercas greek letter omega .
the famili of event of interest to us is usual repres by a script f .
and the probabl measur is repres inevit by the letter p in bold font .
these , if you wish , you can think of as the probabilist's triniti .
on last exampl pai for all .
addit onc more .
so let's begin with a set , an abstract set .
of cours , we have a sampl space , omega .
defin a partit of omega to be ani finit collect of event .
sai , a1 , a2 , a3 through a finit , all countabl infinit collect .
right .
and we will denot it in notat by simpli a set of event , a with a subscript j or a j , for exampl , run through the natur number .
either a finit rang or all the natur number .
thi is call a partit of omega .
if the event aj ar mutual disjoint , the intersect of ani two of them is empti .
and the event ar so constitut that togeth , thei make up the entir sampl space .
right ?
in other word , the union of all these aj is omega and thi is sort of visual indic in the cut , the partit i've show you on the right in your figur .
the moment we have thi , addit immedi give rise to the follow ident .
right .
thi is the axiom of addit for probabl measur and we're go to appli it to the union of all these aj .
by normal , the sampl space ha got unit probabl , but the sampl space mai be decompos into a disjoint union of a finit or countabl infinit collect of event .
and so by addit , thi must be equal to the sum of the probabl of these event .
and so here is a conclus .
if on ha a partit of the sampl space , then the sum of the probabl of the member of the partit must be on .
thi is a power , gener idea in principl .
again , thi is addit to the four .
but thi principl at it heart , it great util , rest on the idea , thi philosoph idea that we can take a complex problem and break it up into piec , which have got individu charact , which you can then analyz .
and then again , just stitch everyth togeth by ad up all the piec .
veri powerfu , gener principl .
a particular manifest of thi is someth we've alreadi seen and turn out to be quit remark us .
consid a veri special case , where we partit omega into two piec .
a set a and what remain ?
well , of cours , the complement of a .
clearli , the set a and a complement ar a partit of omega .
a and a complement , share no element .
thei ar disjoint and the union is all of omega .
our addit principl immedi tell us then , that the some of the probabl of a and the complement of a must inde perforc be unit .
we us thi repeatedli in our elementari exampl .
and i can't emphas enough how us and import thi observ is .
summari of tableau five .
toward an axiomat theori of probabl , the abstract probabl space .
in move to an axiomat framework , we identifi three fundament element which underli game of chanc .
the first , the identif of the sampl space omega , which is the conceptu space of all possibl , conceiv outcom , of a thought experi , a gedanken experi .
thi wa the object identifi by formic , and it's a start point in a probabilist endeavor .
identifi what thi piec of possibl is .
the second element , the idea of an event as a subset of ideal outcom , a subset of the sampl space .
the collect of event form an algebra of event .
wherea with an ordinari algebra , we can massag object us union , intersect , set differ , and complement .
and the third and final element , the assign of a probabl measur .
a set function to event .
now , the idea of a probabl measur is complic on the surfac .
if it is to fit in with our understand of probabl intuit , it must satisfi .
we must ascrib to it three axiom .
the axiom of posit , the axiom of normalis , and the axiom of addit .
but thi is a veri complic object .
thi is not our grandfath's function .
it's a set function .
it's complex .
it argument ar set .
and all these interrelationship within event ar difficult to keep track of , especi in larg space .
so , an actual question then is how doe on construct probabl measur ?
we shall come to thi , okai ?
ideal of cours , our construct will reflect an intuit realiti .
the feel we have that if we perform a chanc experi independ , repeatedli , then the frequenc of occurr of an event should be reflect in thi probabl .
and inde , we'll find in accumul lectur that thi in fact is the case .
and thi establish the , the framework for why we believ in such a theori of chanc .
now , from an abstract point of view , thi axiomat structur immedi give us certain low hang fruit , simpl consequ .
and these , we should have under our belt .
first , the empti set ha got <num> probabl .
an immedi consequ of thi is that probabl ar bound between <num> and <num> .
the book end , <num> for the empti set , and <num> for the sampl space .
monoton , the kei and import properti , is also an immedi consequ .
if two set of event satisfi an inclus relationship , then the probabl will follow in the natur direct .
a consequ of thi is the subtl inequ of bool .
the probabl of a union of event is no larger than the sum of the individu probabl .
addit come to the floor again when you talk about partit .
if we partit the sampl space into disjoint element , then the sum of the probabl of those element must be on .
and , a consequ of thi is thi i , ident inclus and exclus , which connect the probabl of disjunct or union on on hand , to the probabl of intersect on the other .
now , befor we move on , these basic idea ar so import that we should realli take stalk .
all right , bear in mind that the kei , kei element here ar three in number .
the sampl space , the algebra of event , and the probabl measur .
on experi ha taught me that when a student who is new to the subject is confront with a problem , her first reaction is to scrambl around , look for a formula .
someth you can plug in , someth , and get an answer quickli .
thi is usual ill advis .
the first step in a problem in chanc alwai involv the follow idea .
can you identifi the chanc element of the problem at hand ?
here is the acid test for whether you can identifi these .
if you tell me , here is a put sampl point or ideal outcom for , of the experi , then the moment that sampl point is identifi , there can be no residu uncertainti as to what happen in the experi .
to make thi concret , imagin an experi where on throw two dice .
well , what ar the outcom ?
if on were to sai , and cautious , that the outcom is a number from on through six , that leav a lot of thing uncertain .
which die ar we talk about ?
and probabl , what happen to the other die ?
to come to a right understand of what realli happen , on will have to specifi what happen to each of the two dice .
what ha to happen then a convent for describ what we mean .
so for exampl , you could sai a pair of number , three and six .
mean that the die , which is color red , show three .
the die , which is color white , show six .
there's a convent here , a dictionari of translat which is establish ahead of time , which explain what the convent ar .
and at , at the end of the dai , a pair like three , comma , six tell us exactli what happen when on threw those two dice .
thi is our acid test , when you specifi the sampl point , when you specifi the sampl space .
the moment on specifi a sampl point , there can be no residu uncertainti in what happen in the experi .
of cours , there ar mani differ wai then of specifi , in notat , complex experi .
pick on .
onc you have thi under your belt , you know have a represent for these ideal outcom for these sampl point .
identifi the kei event of interest .
and bear in mind that an event must per forc , be a subcollect , a subset of the sampl point you've identifi .
if on cannot identifi exactli the subset under discuss , then on is alreadi in deep hot water .
on doesn't know what the object is for which you're go to ascrib a probabl .
and of cours , we can onli expect that bad thing will come out of such a lack of coher .
so , the second step ha to be , onc you identifi the sampl space as a set , which subset of that space ar interest for our problem ?
these ar the event at hand .
and the third and final step , of cours , is to ascrib to the event of interest a probabl which satisfi the basic axiom of probabl .
so , our next step would be to sai , well , how doe on construct probabl measur ?
thi look like a veri complex and complic object .
it is a set function , for cry out loud .
and of cours , we turn to elementari exampl for which we have a lot of intuit to see how we might proce .
thi is the subject of our next tableau .
tableau six .
probabl in simpl set .
part on discret space .
now thi far in our develop , we began by consid chanc experi in simpl set .
and out of these , build an axiomat framework for a mathemat theori of chanc .
the framework rest upon a conceptu gedanken chanc experi and a collect of ideal outcom for such an experi .
the set compris of all conceiv outcom is in the languag of robert formosa's , what we call the sampl space .
our first task is to identifi the conceptu sampl space under consider .
next , the evet of interest to us ar subset of thi sampl space .
the event form an algebra in which we have the analogu , the set theoret analogu of addit and multipl .
final , we have the idea of a probabl measur .
thi is a set function , which assign to event probabl .
now probabl measur is subject to three fundament axiom .
the axiom of posit , probabl , mirror chanc is alwai non neg .
the axiom of normal .
the entir sampl space correspond to a certain event ha got probabl on .
and final , the import axiom of addit .
now , at thi point , the student could well ask .
well , thi is all well and good , but probabl measur as a set function look like a horribl complic object .
how doe on in practic design , alloc a probabl measur to a problem at hand ?
as alwai in thi kind of set , we turn to our experi with chanc and commonplac set .
thu far , all the exampl we have look at deal with chanc in what we mai call discret space , or discret set .
the word discret that we us here stand for finit or countabl infinit .
if you cast your , your ey back , metaphor speak , to the particular problem we've look at , you'll recogn that everi on of the problem ha outcom , which on could enumer .
the outcom were either finit in number , or could be enumer sequenti in principl , were there world enough and time .
for exampl , by count them out a la the natur number or the integ .
now , thi is the set that we have look at there , so far , and therefor thi provid a us test set in which we can test out our assumpt , our axiom , and see whether we can construct probabl measur in conson with the axiom .
so , let us begin .
the first exampl we look at date back to the awaken in 17th centuri europ , in the glitter salon run from pari through vienna to pragu .
and , we posit as our first problem , the problem pose by chevali de mere and here is on of the two problem that he pose .
suppos a die is thrown four time .
what ar the chanc that no ac is seen ?
now let's paus and summar our discoveri in the light of the nomenclatur , the terminolog that we built up .
first , what ar the ideal outcom of thi chart's experi ?
what is the sampl space ?
now , it is natur in thi set to identifi the outcom of the die throw on at a time .
the first throw , the second throw , the third throw , the fourth throw .
in thi sens , as far as the collect outcom ar concern , the experi is indistinguish from throw four distinct dice , let's sai four differ color dice , at the same time .
time is not of the essenc at thi point .
now , on doe thi .
then we simpli label the outcom , outcom by outcom for each of the four dice .
and we then end up as an ideal outcom for the overal experi , a fourtupl of integ .
natur we'll give integ name , sai k1 for the first die , k2 for the second , k3 for the third , and k4 for the fourth .
and thi order fourtupl of integ , where each integ run between on through six , form all possibl conceiv outcom of thi experi .
now , the natur descript here is in term of fourtupl of integ .
but in principl , there ar a finit number of possibl outcom .
in fact , exactli <num> to the power of <num> outcom , <num> , <num> such fourtupl .
and we could , in principl , have just label them on , two , three , four , five , all the wai up to <num> , <num> .
of cours then , thi would reli upon us have a dictionari of translat , where for each fourtupl , we can assign a number .
a rose by ani other name would smell as sweet in thi context .
it make littl matter what we call an outcom , as long as we can identifi it .
now , have got thi collect of outcom , what ar the event of interest here ?
well , in thi case , the event is the event , let us sai a , that no ac is seen .
identifi the word ac in thi context , with throw a six on , in a die .
now if no ac is seen , then none of your four die throw could result in an ac .
and therefor , a , correspond to the particular subset of fourtupl , where none of the element , k1 , k2 , k3 , or k4 , can be <num> .
in other word k1 , k2 , k3 , and k4 have to repres number from on through five .
there ar exactli five to the power of four , or <num> differ ideal outcom in thi particular subset .
final , we come to the idea of a measur of chanc .
the probabl measur here build in two stage .
first , we identifi thi experi as on of a gener class of er model .
where everi ideal outcom or sampl point is equal like .
what doe it mean ?
well , there ar <num> to the power <num> possibl sampl point in the sampl space .
<num> , <num> sampl point .
and therefor , to that event consist of a singleton sampl point .
now what doe that mean ?
it is a set consist of on outcom alon .
let's sai the outcom we pick consist of the integ k1 , k2 , k3 , and k4 , k4 .
notic the nomenclatur , the terminolog .
we put curli bracket around the singl outcom to distinguish it from an outcom .
thi is a set consist of on outcom .
thi kind of distinct seem like just shuffl word around , but it is import .
you see , probabl measur can assign valu to set , not to sampl point .
and therefor , we identifi the singleton sampl point consist of on element .
and to each such singleton sampl point , we alloc a valu <num> over <num> .
thi is how we begin .
to borrow the languag from physic , we will think of singleton sampl point as atom of thi experi .
now , we've alloc equal mass in thi terminolog , in thi languag , to the atom .
now , we build up on thi by look at the event a , which consist of <num> differ atom .
and , alloc to a the sum of the atom probabl for each of the atom .
of cours , in thi case it is veri , veri , veri simpl .
becaus , each of the atom ha got the same probabl , <num> over <num> to the power of <num> , <num> over <num> , <num> .
there ar exactli <num> differ element in a , and therefor the probabl of a is the cardin of a , <num> divid by the cardin of omega , <num> , <num> .
now , thi is a set of urn model where all outcom ar equal like .
how do we proce if we move on to a set where the outcom ar not equal like ?
well we can set the first throw in the game of crap .
recal in crap , we repeatedli throw a pair of dice and in the first throw , we've thrown two dice , and we simpli sum the face valu .
the question , what is the chanc of lose on that first throw in thi game ?
what is the sampl space ?
well , as long we're consid just the first throw , we're sum the face valu of two dice and therefor the number , that we were to obtain ar between <num> and <num> .
the sampl space consist of exactli <num> point , the integ <num> through <num> , excel , what is the event of interest here ?
well the rule of crap sai that you lose on the first throw , if you happen to throw a <num> or <num> or a <num> .
thi , then is the event a of interest .
it consist of that particular subset of these three sampl point <num> , <num> , and <num> .
how doe on assign a probabl of measur to thi experi ?
again , we begin on atom at a time .
elementari consider lead us to assign to the atom consist of the set with just the element <num> in it .
the probabl <num> in <num> .
and likewis , for the atom consist of the element <num> .
for <num> and <num> , we assign a chanc of <num> in <num> for <num> .
and <num> , we assign a chanc of <num> in <num> , and so forth .
now we now have a system of atom probabl .
how do we comput the probabl of a ?
well , we identifi that a is compris of three atom , <num> , <num> and <num> , and we simpli sum the atom probabl to get the probabl of a .
now , how doe on go beyond thi ?
well , the next experi we can suggest wa when we have not just a finit number of outcom , but a denumer infinit number of outcom .
and , so we return to the toss of a coin .
the experi in context wa the follow .
toss a coin repeatedli until the same face show twice , then stop .
what ar the chanc that in thi experi on ha to toss the coin four or more time ?
well , let us begin with a sampl space .
now , of cours , thi is an infinit sampl space , so we can't enumer all of them , but we can deduc what the pattern is .
for exampl , a sampl point could consist of two head , or two tail .
or , as we've seen , a tail , and two head , or a head , and two tail .
or a head , a tail , and two head .
or a tail , and a head , and a two , and two tail .
and so on , and now the pattern becom clear .
a sampl point ha got altern head and tail , and termin with two of the same face .
now befor we go on , thi look like a messi descript of the sampl space , but we realiz we could actual enumer it .
and in thi case , on possibl enumer is to identifi , to renam the sampl point consist of two head and call it just on now .
renam the sampl point consist of two tail , call it minu on .
a tail and head and a head , call it two , minu two , three , minu three and so forth .
and it becom clear that if on take awai the particular structur languag , the color of the coin toss experi .
that thi is an instanc where the sampl space mai be identifi with a set of integ .
of cours , there's an assumpt here that on establish a dictionari of translat ahead of time .
so that if i sai , the integ three , then it is clear to all parti involv that three stand for the outcom , a head , a tail , follow by two head .
but onc the dictionari of translat is establish , then the sampl space is just the collect of integ .
now , in thi space , what is the event of interest ?
the coin is toss four or more time .
well , let's write thi event in term of our identif of the sampl space as a set of integ .
well , look at a tabl , it's clear that four or more toss correspond precis to the integ , three or minu three , four or minu four , five or minu five , ad infinitum .
and therefor , we can in a veri compact sens , write down the event a of interest , that four or more toss ar requir .
as a collect of integ k , which an absolut valu , is at least <num> .
thi is nice and simpl .
at least , it's a compact descript of what wa a rather verbos , a color coin toss descript of thi problem .
but of cours , thi presum that there is an underli dictionari of translat .
final , how doe on alloc a probabl measur at thi set ?
now , thi is clearli not an urn model ani more .
thi is a more complex model .
but , we've argu from first principl , that it is natur to alloc to each atom , probabl which decai exponenti in power of <num> .
thu , the sampl point <num> form the atom consist of just <num> as a sampl point , ha probabl <num> in <num> , as doe the atom consist of , just the outcom , two tail .
two head , two tail , half label k be <num> or minu <num> .
and therefor , we can identifi with these particular atom a , an exponenti decreas probabl .
how on doe thi , right ?
we have a systemat assign , assign of probabl .
on quarter and on quarter , on eighth and on eighth , on sixteenth and on sixteenth , and so forth .
how doe on evalu a probabl ?
well , a consist of all integ <num> or larger .
to a , we assign the probabl , which is the sum of the atom probabl , sum of these reciproc power of <num> .
and when we do thi we obtain , as we saw here , the probabl <num> in <num> .
we should now us thi to come up with an idea of how on build chanc model in discreet set .
thi is next .
what lesson can be deduc from chanc and common place set ?
to be , we start with a discret sampl space .
thi is space which is either finit or altern , infinit .
we could via dictionari of translat , identifi the sampl point of such an experi , either with natur number or with integ .
it'll turn out , it'll transpir that in mani set , the particular name we give a sampl point is of littl matter .
what matter ar it chanc connot .
and therefor , in mani set , it'll be prefer to make the problem antisept and simpli identifi conceptu outcom sampl point with integ .
so we start we start with a discret sampl space .
given a discret sampl space , the first item of busi in construct a probabl measur is to identifi atom probabl .
we start with elementari event call atom , which consist of singleton event , event consist of a singl sampl point , and to each such sampl point , sai omega k , to the correspond atom , we alloc a probabl .
an atom probabl , of cours , thi will onli depend upon the particular sampl point under consider .
sai the k is sampl point , and therefor let us call the atom probabl attach to the sampl point omega k , p of k ; where we us a lower case p to denot an ordinari function of an integ argument .
now , what do we need from these atom probabl ?
well , manifestli , thei ar probabl and therefor , thei have to satisfi posit and furthermor , these probabl have to satisfi normalis .
thei have to add to <num> .
so , we start with atom probabl which ar posit and add to <num> .
now , how do we go about construct event probabl in gener ?
well , we start with ani event , and we can think of an event in a discret space as be the union of a discret set of atom and so , manifestli , if a probabl is to be design at all , it must be given by a sum of probabl .
how do we go about do thi ?
well , the notat on the screen sai sum over all the sampl point insid that event , the probabl of the correspond atom .
if the event a at the consider consist of , let us sai , gener the k1 exampl point , the k2 exampl point , the k3 exampl point and so on .
for exampl , the second sampl point , the fifth sampl point , the 19th sampl point .
then on would simpli add the probabl of the atom correspond to second , the fifth , the 19th , and so forth .
thi of cours we realiz is our third fundament axiom , the axiom of addit .
let us now summar what thi mean for our purpos .
so to character chanc in a discret set we begin first by identifi atom , singleton event in the space .
and our fundament realiz is that in discret space , atom ar the carrier of mass .
notic we ar veri freeli borrow from the languag of physic .
now how do we go about alloc mass ?
well , to each atom , let's the k of atom , we alloc a probabl p of k .
the atom probabl determin a function , p of an integ .
we call thi a game borrow from the languag of physic , a mass function or a distribut .
thi function must satisfi the kei axiom of posit and normalis .
given such a mass function , how do we go about construct probabl .
well , veri simpli .
the probabl measur alloc to ani particular subset , ani particular event in the sampl space a probabl .
obtain by sum the atom probabl correspond to that event .
the whole is manifestli , the sum of it's distinguish part .
veri simpl , veri clean .
at thi point , it becom clear that in a discret space , the experi can be captur in a veri , veri simpl wai , all right .
now thi is a polit ag and therefor we need some slogan to go along with our cours .
so , here's our slogan .
ani honest mass function p of k , the final datag , induc a discret probabl measur for some space .
what is an honest mass function or honest distribut ?
well , what make it honest is that it satisfi the fundament axiom of posit and normalis .
with such a mass function in hand , all we do to construct probabl is simpli add up atom probabl for the event at hand .
have built up a right understand of how to construct a probabl measur in a discret space , we should promptli try out some exampl for mass function to build up intuit .
so let us start with what i shall call the usual culprit .
these ar distribut of mass function which crop up repeatedli again and again in theori and in practic .
so let us begin with the simplest of them all , the combinatori distribut .
we start with an integ paramet n fix but arbitrari , three , five , ten , <num> , <num> million , what have you .
the sampl space correspond to the integ from <num> through n .
for exampl , if n wa <num> thi could be the sampl space correspond to the throw of a dime .
we consid the follow alloc of atom probabl to the sampl point <num> through n .
alloc to each p k , for k run from on through n , equal valu <num> over n .
now , when i posit that thi is a , an honest mass function , than i am sai in fact that the axiom of probabl ar in fact satisfi .
ar thei ?
which veri quickli test thi out .
the first axiom of posit .
is the mass function posit ?
of cours , thi is complet trite .
the number <num> over n is a posit number .
for each of the valu , <num> through n .
so , p k is manifestli posit .
what about normalis ?
well , normalis is equal trite .
in thi case , if i sum the valu of p k , k run from <num> to n .
so i'm ad the valu p <num> to p <num> , all the wai up through p n .
but each of these is equal to the same valu , <num> over n , and there ar n term in the sum .
therefor you get n time <num> over n or <num> and normalis is again trite satisfi .
thi is by far the simplest probabl measur in a discret space and thi wa the focu of classic probabl .
probabl in antiqu .
the game of chanc , urn model , all reli upon thi at some fundament level .
in set like thi , it is natur to ask , is it possibl to write the probabl of event in a nice and compact wai ?
and inde on can .
so , suppos a is ani event .
an event in the space is then a subset of the number from <num> through n .
well then the probabl of a is obtain via addit , simpli as the sum of the atom probabl .
but all the atom have equal probabl <num> over n .
and therefor the probabl of a is given simpli by the number of element in a divid by n .
the cardin of a divid by n , or in more colloqui languag , the number of outcom favor for a divid by the total number of possibl outcom .
here's anoth exampl .
slightli more complex thi time .
thi lead to the august binomi distribut .
it's a littl more complex .
now there ar two paramet in plai .
first , a posit integ paramet , n .
and second , a posit real paramet .
that is tradition call lowercas p .
it's a number between <num> and <num> .
in such set it is inevit to write q to be <num> minu p , so q again is anoth real number .
also between <num> and <num> , and p plu q take valu exactli <num> .
the sampl space here is a set of integ from <num> all the wai up to n .
the sampl space consist of n plu <num> point .
now , i have co opt the letter littl p here as a paramet of thi distribut .
so i don't want to us p of k for the mass function .
let's us b k .
b stand for binomi for the mass function .
now .
in a movabl form , thi is a mass function or distribut which ha got two paramet .
two fix constant .
fix but arbitrari .
n and p .
so sometim in a slightli more verbal notat , we would write b with a subscript n .
the argument k tell you which outcom is in plai .
and a semicolon , follow by the second paramet p .
and the reason for the choic of such an involv nomenclatur will be come appar as we go along .
but alloc to the outcom , the atom probabl given by n choos k time p to the power k time q to the power n minu k , k now run through the integ valu <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> up til n .
these ar put atom probabl for an experi .
ar these honest , ar these legitim ?
natur enough , we want to verifi posit and normalis .
let's talk of posit first .
well , again thi is trite .
the express b sub n of k and p is involv binomi coeffici which by definit is non neg .
and involv puddl of posit quantiti , and therefor , it is strictli posit .
and therefor , these atom probabl ar all posit .
for each of the valu k run from <num> through n .
posit is trite satisfi .
what about normalis ?
paus for a moment .
write down a normalis sum .
and see if we can verifi inde that these form an honest mass function .
when you're readi , start the lectur .
okai .
so now we're look for normalis .
let rest try write down a normalis sum .
you're go to sum all our possibl for k , k now run between integ from <num> to n , and then you write down these binomi probabl .
did you recogn a binomi sum in there , did you recogn the binomi theorem come into plai ?
that sum , is exactli the binomi expans of p plu q to the power n .
if you don't rememb thi , you should go back , take a look at the summari in tableau <num> part <num> .
now rememb , q wa defin to be <num> minu b and , therefor , p plu q is ident <num> and <num> to the power n is manifestli <num> and , therefor , normalis is satisfi .
perhap , no , not quit so trite thi time .
we need a binomi ident , but nonetheless , we have an honest mask function in hand .
thi distribut turn out to be the first of the three fundament distribut in all the probabl .
we will see that it make an appear when we talk about poll .
when you talk about accumul success in repeat trial in gambl game it aris natur in statist test .
it's a fundament distribut .
for our purpos todai , all that matter is it is a function of k which is honest .
it is a mass function .
it is posit .
it add to on .
to formul probabl , i'm go to have to add atom probabl .
as the combinatori case , i could hope to find simpl close form compact descript of event probabl .
sadli , we don't have such simpl form avail to us , in set like thi .
so we'll have to have re cours to either analyt estim .
all simpl numer probabl comput start by ad up variou element of a binomi sum .
the origin of the name , the binomi distribut , ar now clear .
it's becaus of the binomi coeffici that appear in the definit of thi object .
the next of the major distribut goe back to the year <num> .
it wa discov by senior poisson and in hi honor it is call the poisson distribut .
thi is a singl paramet distribut .
tradition the paramet is call lambda .
lambda is strictli a posit paramet .
the sampl space here is all non neg integ .
tradit compel us sometim to write thi as z with the superscript plu .
to denot the collect of non neg integ .
the probabl we want to assign to atom , sai to the number k , k be some non neg integ , we alloc probabl p k .
and sometim to make explicit that there's an underli paramet fix but arbitrari posit constant in plai we write it as p k semi colon lambda .
we defin thi with a particular exponenti form .
e to the power minu lambda time lambda to the power k over k factori and k here run through all the atom .
k run through all the integ , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth .
now thi look like a more complex form .
now we have not just a finit number of atom probabl , but an infinit number of them , albeit a countabl infin .
natur , we want to check posit , and again we see that thi is trite , the exponenti function is alwai posit , power of a posit number ar posit , the factori is posit , and therefor the poisson probabl ar posit .
and therefor , posit is trite .
what about normalis ?
paus for a moment .
write down your normalis sum , and see if you recogn the sum , someth from elementari calculu , perhap an atavist memori might stir .
paus the lectur and when you ar readi , we start .
so let's write down the sum of the poisson probabl .
here the index k run through all the non neg integ .
the e to the power minu lambda doesn't depend upon k .
it can come out of the sum .
and we had a sum of lambda to the power k , divid by k factori .
did you discov , did you recov , the exponenti function ?
the express of the sum is exactli the exponenti seri for e to the power lambda .
and therefor , you get e to the power of minu lambda , time e to the power lambda .
by the rule of expon , thi is exactli on , and normalis is verifi .
excel .
thi distribut is a second of the three fundament distribut in all of probabl .
and we'll see exampl .
it aris in the context rare event , hurrican , collaps , failur of machineri .
it aris in arriv process , in queue .
and we shall see sever rich applic involv distribut as we move along .
the last of our elementari exampl is what's call the geometr distribut .
thi is a singl paramet distribut .
it is determin by a posit real paramet .
again , sadli call littl p .
which take a valu between <num> and <num> .
again , in thi context , we'll write q to mean <num> p and again q is also a number between <num> and <num> .
the sampl space for thi experi , i won't specifi what the experi is , but i shall eventu .
is the collect of nonneg integ .
<num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , ad infinitum .
now again , i've co opt littl p for a paramet of the distribut , it's a fix constant .
and therefor i need to give the mass function , the distribut a differ name .
let me call it w k .
the w k is the atom probabl associ with the sampl point the integ k .
again , if it becom import to bear in mind the underli paramet for thi experi .
thi quantiti which is fix .
but arbitrari that we'll write a w k ; p .
now w k is defin to be q to the power k time p , k run over all the non neg integ , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth .
and now the reason for the name becom appar .
what i've given you is a geometr declin set of probabl as k increas .
therefor , thi is call a geometr distribut .
of cours , we should verifi posit and normalis posit .
and we realiz immedi that q to the power of k is alwai posit , p is alwai posit .
and therefor , posit is trite .
these geometr probabl ar strictli posit for everi non neg integ .
what about normalis ?
again , part of lectur .
write down a normalis sum and see if it trigger some atavist memori from the calculu which can allow you to write down the answer in on line .
when you're readi , restart the lectur .
good , let's write down the normalis sum .
so we have a sum over all the mass atom probabl .
sum over the mass function as k vari .
rememb , p is a fix but arbitrari paramet .
now in the express q to the k time p .
q doe not depend on k , therefor can come out of the sum .
and so we have to evalu a sum of k , of q to the power of k , and you might recogn sinc q is a number between <num> and <num> , that we have a geometr seri come into plai , the sum of power of q is a reciproc of <num> minu q , and therefor we get p divid by <num> minu q .
recal that <num> minu q is just anoth name for p , and therefor we get normalis .
so in fact we have a , an honest mass function .
thi mass function , thi distribut aris .
in model of wait time , in model of run length when we have sequenc of some event happen befor someth els happen .
and again , thi is on of the fundament distribut .
so let's summar .
in discret space , what is import is the identif of an honest mass function .
let us test the understand we've built up by look at simpl exampl .
so here is the first .
for what valu of constant , sai c , is a particular put mass function , p of k , defin to be the constant , which is yet unspecifi , time <num> to the power minu k defin on the non neg integ , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth , ad infinitum .
if on specifi a distribut of thi form , is there a valu for the constant c which would make it a bona fide mass function .
an honest mass function .
paus the lectur and see if you can work your wai through with it .
now that you're back , in set like these , posit is usual simpl to verifi .
and in thi case , sinc <num> to the power minu k is alwai posit , we know that if a constant is to work at all , then the constant must be posit .
okai .
so in such set the question is whether thing can in fact be normal .
and the issu here is whether the sum of all element actual converg , whether the seri converg .
but in thi case it's a veri simpl seri .
thi is the geometr declin seri .
it's an exponenti declin seri .
and therefor we have a geometr seri formula .
the sum of reciproc power of <num> is manifestli the re , the reciproc of <num> minu a half .
in other word , the entir sum of <num> to the power of minu k , k run from zero to infin , is exactli <num> .
so if we sum up all of the pk's , we'll get <num> time c .
normal mandat that that ha to be on .
and therefor c must be equal to on half .
now onc you're written thi down you sai well thi look familiar .
and inde it is .
thi , in fact , is exactli the geometr distribut we saw in the last slide .
thi is the geometr distribut with a particular choic for the paramet .
the paramet here is on half .
here is a second problem , a slight variat on thi theme .
thi time i'm go to give you a function , p of k , which is defin as some constant time e to the power minu the absolut valu of k , and k is allow to run over all integ , posit and neg .
for what valu of c would thi be a bona fide distribut ?
would thi be an honest mass function ?
again , paus the lectur while you try to work it out .
well , again , posit is trite here .
the exponenti function is alwai posit and therefor , if it is to work at all , c must be a posit constant .
posit is usual trite .
and so , everyth hing upon whether thi seri converg .
suppos we add up all the element e to the power minu absolut valu of k , k run over all integ .
we find that at k equal to zero we get a contribut of on .
and then you get a doubl contribut for each valu of k , e to the power minu <num> for k equal to <num> and minu <num> , e to the power minu <num> for k equal to plu and minu <num> and so forth .
and so the seri devolv into anoth geometr seri .
and if we sum thi geometr seri and massag the algebra , out come a veri simpl express .
we get the sum of the seri is e plu <num> over e minu <num> .
e , of cours , is the napier constant , <num> . <num> and so forth .
and thi is what the seri converg to .
if you sum the valu pk , thei will get e plu <num> over e minu <num> time c and thi must by normal equal <num> , and therefor c is a reciproc of thi ratio or in other word , c is e minu <num> divid by e plu <num> .
yet on more .
now i will take the function i have just given you .
c time e to pi  minu absolut valu of k and modul it by multipli it by a valu which is no more than on in absolut valu , cosin of pi  time k .
can thi function , defin as k vari over all integ , be a distribut for ani choic of the constant c ?
again , paus the lectur and see if you can verifi thi .
now that you're back , it would be tempt to test normal by write down a seri .
but we should paus for a moment , the easi axiom to check normal is posit and we should alwai do a saniti check .
ar thing posit ?
and we immedi find someth troubl .
cosin of pi  time k when k is <num> is <num> .
when k is <num> or minu <num> , cosin is minu <num> .
in fact , when k is an even number , cosin of pi  time k is plu <num> .
and when k is an odd number , cosin of pi  time k is minu <num> .
the cosin altern in sign between plu <num> and minu <num> .
which mean that p of k , howev we choos c , will be altern in sign between posit and neg valu .
posit is immedi violat .
whatev be the choic of c , there would be some valu k for which these valu p of k will be neg .
and therefor thi cannot repres an atom probabl , p of k cannot repres an honest mass function .
to summar the kei idea , probabl measur is posit , is normal , is addit .
and in the context of discret space , everyth simplifi .
so to summar what you have learn , indiscret set .
to begin , atom , singleton event , event consist of singl sampl point , carri mass in discret space .
these atom probabl , let us sai that we had to defin a particular outcom , omega k .
the atom consist of omega k is alloc a probabl that we call lowercas p of k .
as k vari , as we run through all possibl sampl point , we determin a function of the integ .
thi function is call a mass function or a distribut .
and , it'll suffic for us to check to see that the mass function is a , posit , and b , properli normalis .
these ar the saniti check we'll alwai run through .
onc we have thi under our belt , then , we put togeth event probabl .
we construct a probabl measur , a set function on event by simpli appeal to the addit axiom .
ani event , let's sai an event consist of the k1th outcom , k2th outcom , and so forth .
ha probabl alloc to it obtain by sum the atom probabl correspond to k1 , k2 , k3 , and so forth .
addit ride to the rescu .
addit now give us a trite comput of probabl measur .
occasion , depend on the particular function form for the mass function , it turn out we have nice and eleg analyt express for such probabl .
at other time we have to be satisfi with numer evalu of these probabl .
but in all case , we now have a complet and satisfactori construct .
which give us probabl measur in discreet space .
now for the first half of thi class , an understand of probabl measur and discreet space will suffic .
we can build a veri rich and vibrant theori alreadi with thi understand .
but of cours , eventu we would want to move on to even more complex set .
part <num> of thi top low show how on could move from the discreet set to non discreet set to continu set .
tableau <num> , probabl in simpl set , part <num> , continu space .
in our develop of axiomat probabl , we had identifi three fundament element which ar part of the subject .
the sampl space , the algebra of event , and the probabl measur .
and the crux of the develop depend upon our abil to form a probabl measur , a set function , which satisfi the fundament axiom of posit , normal , and addit .
we saw how in discret set thi is possibl by the simpl expedi of specifi a mass function , or a distribut on the integ .
now thi is all that suffic for most simpl , commonplac exampl , but eventu , of cours , we want to move the theori to more complex set .
what if the underli space is not discret ?
how should on go about construct a probabl measur in such set ?
as alwai , we should build up some more intuit by look at set where these kind of concept come into plai .
and as alwai , we return to the toss of a coin .
so , let's consid the follow new experi .
suppos on toss a coin repeatedli , without end .
now , you understand of cours , that thi is a fundament conceptu experi .
it can never actual be perform becaus it demand that the coin toss go on indefinit .
but , on can conceiv of do thi .
thi is a bona fide gedankenexperi .
now onc you have a chanc experi like thi , how should on go about put togeth a probabl space for thi experi ?
well let's start with the form basi , sampl space .
well what is a sampl space omega for such an experi ?
well natur enough , omega must consist of all infinit sequenc of head and tail .
well , okai , thi is make my head hurt .
but in principl , i can conceiv of what that mean .
right ?
sequenc of head and tail .
head , head , head , tail , head , head , tail , head , tail , and so on .
and all such sequenc .
it's a veri larg look number of possibl .
but whatev it is , i can conceptu it .
the question now is , with thi complic look , fuzzi space , is there a simpl character of subset , of event in such a space ?
and if on goe ahead and character subset of interest for us , how doe on go about put togeth a probabl measur which is bona fide , mean that it satisfi the three axiom .
as is usual , sometim a differ perspect bring a magic clariti to an otherwis murki busi .
let's try to restat the problem a littl bit .
but first , the identif of head and tail is neither here nor there .
you could call a head anyth you like , and a tail anyth you like , and as long as there wa a prior agreement and dic , dictionari of translat , there would be no ambigu in what transpir .
suppos we identifi with head , or success , the number <num> .
and suppos we identifi with tail , or failur , the number <num> .
now onc we have number , our experi with mathemat through high school and through earli colleg allow us to write down mathemat express for sequenc of number .
and at least formal , we can identifi the sampl space under consider here as simpli a sequenc of digit .
inevit , we'll call these digit letter x , and we'll us a subscript to identifi the locat in the sequenc , x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , ad infinitum .
these x's ar binari digit .
thei must be either 0s and 1s , becaus thei repres head and tail .
all such infinit sequenc of x's correspond precis to sanit , ideal outcom of thi chanc experi .
so omega is a famili of infinit binari string .
notic all we've done is renam head and tail .
but the moment we have renam it , and in particular renam it us number , all kind of other memori ar trigger .
perhap we can find a differ perspect for thi .
let's , for exampl , take a look at an event of interest .
so here's on .
suppos a repres the event that the first head occur on the fourth toss .
of cours that mean , and it set like thi it is us to build up an imag of what these outcom ar in our head befor we put togeth a mathemat codif which compactifi and systemat our , our instinct .
an event a like thi mean that the first three toss ar tail .
tail , tail , tail .
the fourth toss is a head .
and then follow that , i actual don't care .
it could be ani sequenc .
well in term of our new dictionari , write <num> for head and 0s for tail , thi mean that we're look at sequenc x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 and so forth where x1 , x2 , and x3 ar <num> , thei repres tail .
x4 is <num> , it repres a head .
and x5 onward could be anyth , could be <num> or <num> .
all such sequenc , where the first three element ar <num> , the fourth element is a <num> , and then the remain element can be arbitrari , ar bona fide , card carri sampl point in the event a .
we have now identifi veri precis what the subset of interest is .
sadli , we can't seem to make much further progress .
thi seem okai , thi is good , we at least found a mathemat compact descript for what thi object is .
but how doe on go about construct a probabl measur in thi kind of set ?
thi look complex , difficult .
but as alwai , a differ perspect can sometim open door that were hitherto unsuspect .
as i have said earlier , a differ perspect can lend a magic clariti to an otherwis murki and doubt busi .
let me switch gear .
thi is a non sequitur , a latin rare phrase , mean someth that doe not logic follow from what preced thi .
or at least , it's an appar non sequitur .
a , appar a digress , just to indulg myself , but humor me .
the word dyadic correspond to two choic binari .
okai , so , there's go to be a binari game be plai here .
okai .
let me start with some veri elementari fraction arithmet .
of cours , we go back to the middl school to understand thi .
let's start with the number on half .
okai , now we all know exactli what thi mean .
<num> is the numer , <num> is in the denomin .
so thi mean exactli <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
no problem .
let's try anoth fraction .
let's sai , on quarter .
on quarter mean <num> in the numer time <num> to the power minu <num> , which repres the denomin .
now , sinc we start with the power of , the neg power of <num> , let's build upon thi by sai explicitli .
that i have <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> , plu <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
and you'll tell me , okai so you've given me a long wind descript of on quarter .
but bear with me , there is , of cours , a method in the mad .
let's try anoth fraction .
what about the fraction nine sixteenth ?
well , nine sixteenth can be written as on half plu on sixteenth .
or anoth wai of sai thi is , on half , no contribut from a quarter , no contribut from an eighth , and on sixteenth .
now we see here the begin of an incipi expans of these number on the left in term of reciproc power of <num> multipli by 0s and 1s .
now , to date , all the expans i've shown you ar finit .
right , could we conceiv of an infinit expans in power of <num> ?
but of cours we could .
for exampl , what if we sum reciproc power of even power of <num> ?
for exampl , <num> to the power minu <num> , plu <num> to the power minu <num> , plu <num> to the power minu <num> , and so forth .
of cours , you should write thi down .
and stare at it .
and when you do , you'll see , we recogn our old friend , the geometr seri , yet again .
and thi entir sum , sum to , <num> to the power neg , neg <num> in the numer and in the denomin , <num> minu <num> to the power neg <num> .
the numer is on fourth , the denomin is three quarter .
on quarter divid by three quarter is on third , and we've discov an infinit seri expans for on third .
on third is exactli , via the geometr seri , on quarter plu on sixteenth , plu on sixtyfourth , plu dot , dot , dot , dot , ad infinitum .
in other word , on third is obtain by sum neg power of even power of <num> with no contribut from reciproc odd power of <num> .
here's an infinit expans in neg power of <num> , for yet anoth number .
now these expans ar begin to look like the ordinari decim expans of number that we have grown to be fond of .
for exampl , on half , we write usual as <num> .
by thi we mean , of cours , that there's an implicit decim base , a base <num> in the expans .
<num> mean <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
similarli , on quarter is <num> . <num> .
and by <num> . <num> we mean , <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> plu <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
what i've now shown you is a similar expans for number , but we have replac the base .
the base <num> ha now been replac by a base of <num> .
in which case the multipli thing will be either <num> or <num> .
and therefor in a base <num> expans , we could write on half more compactli as <num> follow by an infinit string of 0s .
all thi mean is , that thi mean <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
on quarter is <num> . <num> follow by an infinit string of zero .
and what thi mean is <num> time <num> the minu <num> , plu <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> , plu <num> time all the other neg power of <num> .
similarli , nine sixteenth is <num> . <num> follow by an infinit string of 0s .
these ar all termin expans .
on third turn to be of the form <num> . <num> , <num> recur indefinit .
okai , now we sai , oh ye , thi is just a differ base represent for real number .
and we scratch our head and sai , oh ye , we understand that we can repres a real number in ani base we choos .
and in particular , if we choos a real number x in the unit interv , x is between <num> and <num> .
then x can be repres in a dyadic expans by an infinit expans involv a binari digit , <num> or <num> , time <num> to the power minu <num> , natur we'll call the first binari digit x1 .
plu a binari digit <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> , we'll call the next binari digit x2 , and so on .
and we'll compactli , we'll ride thi as a dyadic expans as point , a decim point , of cours , in thi case is a binari decim .
follow by x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , a string of 0s and 1s .
oh , wait a minut .
thi sound similar .
thi sound like someth , which is trigger a memori .
didn't we have sequenc x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 and so forth , repres the outcom of my conceptu coin toss experi ?
against all odd , we've discov a pathwai between that conceptu coin toss experi and an experi where i give you an expans for a real number .
now thi is a start point for a veri profit and rich explor .
so what have we discov so far ?
we've discov that everi real number in the unit interv can be repres by an expans in binari digit .
thi is dyadic expans of the real number .
and convers , ani such sequenc of binari digit will result in a particular real number by go through the sum in the binari or the dyadic expans .
thi is interest .
not surpris becaus of our experi with ordinari decim expans .
thi is just a dyadic or binari expans in base two .
but , here's where thing get interest .
thi strike a chord in memori .
thi remind me of someth .
where have i seen infinit sequenc , x1 , x2 , x3 , befor ?
aha !
wasn't that what i call the outcom of my chanc experi ?
these correspond to the ideal sampl point of the experi where i toss a coin repeatedli , indefinit .
so let us without further ado start with the first element in the set .
the abstract sampl space correspond to the perform of a chanc experi .
now we should either be abl to perform such an experi .
or , at least , conceiv of it be perform .
thi wa ask then in a gedanken chanc experi .
a thought experi .
someth that can be conceiv of .
and the moment on perform such an experi , on get outcom .
the ideal outcom of thi chanc experi ar call the sampl point of the experi .
the idea be that if from a pure viscer point of view .
on is perform an experi like throw a die , toss a coin .
and the moment you do thi we ar inherit , acquir an outcom , an ideal outcom by sampl randomli from the possibl for the outcom .
and henc we call the possibl outcom in thi formal set , sampl point .
and togeth the collect of all conceiv sampl point form a rich collect of element , a set of element .
thi set we'll then call the sampl space .
the notion that identifi the famili of event precis and carefulli .
surprisingli it wa rel new , the idea is due to robert fawn mesi , and onli came to fruition around the end of the first quarter of the 20th centuri .
but around that time it becam clear , we have to codifi exactli what the object ar under discuss .
the awaken of probabilist interest in the 17th centuri dure the renaiss and thereaft , saw result emerg and a theori in nexu slowli emerg from the foam as it were .
but the theori wa not well form what we had obtain through the 17th to 18th , and even through the 19th centuri , with a gradual quicken of result , as is the case in much of scienc .
we find a scatter shot set of result without ani formal fabric knit everyth togeth .
what is the worth of a formal theori ?
well the ultim rule of the formal theori is in the rich of the predict it provid .
and a verifi of those predict in common place set .
in thi of cours , the theori of probabl ha been wildli , surpassingli , success .
so , here's where we begin .
identifi , codifi follow formiza .
the collect of all ideal outcom , the sampl point of the experi .
sum notat will lubric the wheel , so let's without further ado .
talk about ideal sampl point of experi , gener sampl point , typic sampl point , and identifi them by the lower case greek letter , omega .
now omega now repres a gener , typic if you wish , outcom of an ideal experi , a sampl point .
the collect of all possibl , conceiv sampl point form thi potenti veri rich space of possibl .
thi is call the sampl space and we inevit us the upper case greek letter omega to repres thi .
now thi is standard tradit notat over the last centuri , but we will not adher slavishli to thi kind of notat convent .
if for exampl our experi turn out integ , then enter of littl omega .
we will inevit repres an integ by a letter from the latin alphabet in the middl portion of the alphabet , i , j , k , l , m , or n typic .
and , the collect of integ , is repres by tradit , by an uppercas zed .
likewis we happen to be deal with a real line .
inevit we describ the outcom , the sampl point .
we denot them by lower case letter at the end of the latin alphabet .
someth like x is your prototyp such letter , sometim y or zed , occasion r , s , t , u or v .
and the collect of real number in the continuum , the real line is denot by an upper case r .
but to proce when we want to talk in abstract we think of the sampl space as repres by an upper case greek omega .
now so much for the sampl space .
you should think about the experi we've done in tableau three and identifi for yourself what the sampl space wa in each of those set .
so far so good .
amus but perhap not of so much moment .
after all , we have seen the similar expans veri earli on in our mathemat experi .
and thi is just a binari or a dyadic expans along the same line .
but here's where .
it might strike a chord in our memori .
where have i seen such expans befor in a differ context ?
ha .
didn't i see such expans as the outcom of my ideal chanc experi in toss a coin repeatedli without end ?
hm , thi suggest now that there's a connect between these number theoret idea and the represent of real number , and the sampl point of my ideal coin toss experi .
thi allow us to complet the loop triumphantli .
recal again the experi is as follow .
we toss a coin repeatedli .
by the identif of a head with a number <num> , and a tail the number <num> , the sampl point of the experi ar infinit sequenc of 1s and 0s .
but everi such infinit sequenc , x1 x2 x3 of 1s and 0s correspond to a real number x .
in it dyadic expans , and therefor to each such sequenc , i could alloc a real number , x .
thi number x is a valu between <num> and <num> , and in a more compact , usual notat , we'll write thi as simpli , the unit interv , <num> to <num> , enclos in squar bracket .
now , we just restat the problem through thi beauti correspond with number .
and we've certainli got a veri compact represent , the unit interv .
thi coin toss experi can be identifi with the unit interv on the real line .
isn't that surpris ?
isn't that beauti ?
now , the moment you've got such a compact represent , other thing start fall into place .
what can i sai about the event a that , that first head occur on the fourth toss ?
well , it's all binari string where the first three element ar <num> , the fourth element is a <num> , and the remain element ar arbitrari .
now what doe it mean ?
it mean i'm look at number with a decim point , point follow by three 0s , <num> .
follow by what ?
well , at on end of the spectrum , i could imagin follow by a sequenc of tail .
an infinit sequenc of tail .
in our new languag , that correspond to the sampl point , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and <num>s repeat at infinitum .
okai , that give me a bonafid x , which is in my a .
at the other end of the spectrum , i could start the sequenc with a <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and follow it with an infin of head .
in other word , repeat on .
now i notic that the binari number , the x correspond to each of these , is at two end of a spectrum .
all other sampl point in a , start with <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , follow by some sequenc of 0s and 1s .
will lie in between these two extrem , and therefor i can identifi a veri compactli .
a is equival to the set of real number .
x , which ar such that the dyadic expans of x lie between two extrem .
on the left , <num> . <num> , recur <num>s .
on the right , <num> . <num> , recur 1s .
and it's clear that ani other possibl for the fifth toss onward will give me a number in between them .
oh thi is nice , okai now i've got a , a compact represent for what thi mean , but the notat <num> . <num> recur <num> . <num> recur .
it's a littl mysteri .
we should dig out and see what doe thi actual mean .
so , let's start with the , with the left hand side .
<num> . <num> , <num> recur , is just a short form for <num> to the power minu <num> or on sixteenth .
easi .
what about the next on ?
paus and write it down and see if the dyadic expans ring a bell befor you proce .
did you discov thi ?
write down <num> . <num> with <num> recur .
just mean in the dyadic expans <num> to the power minu <num> plu <num> to the power minu <num> plu <num> to the power minu <num> and so on , ad infinitum .
but again we discov our old friend , the geometr seri .
thi sum to in the numer , <num> to the power minu <num> .
in the denomin , <num> minu <num> to the power minu <num> .
in the numer i get <num> over <num> , in the denomin i get <num> over <num> .
the ratio then give me <num> over <num> .
and i've discov realli a beauti , magnific descript of the event a that the first head occur on the fourth toss .
it correspond to all real number sandwich in the interv from on sixteenth on on side to on eighth on the other , or in the compact notat that we're us to , it is just the close interv from on sixteenth to on eighth .
oh , we can't ask for a much more beauti and compact represent of thi appar abstrus problem .
now , we could proce from here directli , but in a set like thi , some geometr attribut make thing realli vivid .
a pictur , as thei sai , is worth a <num> , <num> word .
what ar we deal with here ?
we're deal with the unit interv on the real line .
let's plot thi .
now in that unit interv , that's a segment of a line , we ar look at a sub interv .
the sub interv start at the point on sixteenth on the left .
and preced to the right to the point on eighth .
thi is a continuum of real valu .
ani point in thi continuum of real valu correspond via our dictionari of translat via our the dyadic expans .
to a particular sequenc of head and tail .
and therefor correspond to a sampl point in the underli experi .
we should veri quickli test thi out , okai ?
so what is anoth exampl of a point somewher between the two extrem ?
well perhap i could sai , well i have three tail , a head , and a head immedi after that , follow by an infinit string of tail .
now what doe that mean ?
well that mean we have the number <num> . <num> follow by a recur sequenc of 0s .
of cours , thi just mean , <num> to the power minu <num> plu <num> to the power minuss , and we sai , oh yeah , thi is easi .
i get thi .
and thi give me a point which is exactli at the center of the interv .
thi is on such sampl point .
of cours , you could imagin let your , your fanci plain numer here .
you could imagin ani sequenc of 0s and <num>s follow the <num> in the fourth place .
and ani such sequenc will give me a point .
a real number somewher in the .
thi is beauti , thi is eleg .
we realli couldn't ask for more .
but we do , right ?
how doe on go about construct a probabl measur ?
well the moment on ha construct such a simpl and eleg represent for the problem .
then the construct of the measur becom not trite perhap , but perhap evid .
well , let's take a look here , rememb the point , the unit interv repres infinit string of coin toss , but the coin is assum to be fair .
and therefor all string ar statist ident .
there's no reason for on to be favor over the other .
anoth wai of think about thi is thi .
if you take a string of head and tail , and you swap the head with tail and tail with head .
then you'll get new string which have the same charact .
from a statist point of view .
head and tail ar equal like in thi experi .
anoth wai of think about thi is we want to appeal to symmetri .
if you look at all the sequenc in the first quartil of the unit interv .
thei correspond to seven sequenc of head and tail .
if you simpli alter , replac head by tail and tail by head .
replac 1s by 0s and 0s by 1s .
you end up with a correspond quartil at the right end of your unit interv and therefor , thi is anoth wai of sai the first quartil by symmetri should be as like as the last quartil , in fact ani quartil should have the same chanc .
and all of these should have the chanc on in four .
gener veri quickli base on thi idea we sai that the probabl of ani interv , must in fact be proport to the length of that interv .
a quartil , an interv of length on fourth must have a chanc on fourth , an interv of length on half , wherev posit .
should have a chanc of on half .
an interv of length on sixteenth , wherev posit , should have chanc on sixteenth .
and immedi thi give us now a probabl measur .
the probabl of the particular event a , that the first head occur at the fourth toss , .
correspond to the length of the interv from on sixteenth to on eighth , and the length is on eighth minu on sixteenth , or <num> in <num> .
we now have a formul which allow us to comput probabl in a principl and systemat wai .
thi procedur is , satisfi posit , posit trite , becaus length is posit .
it satisfi normal , the unit interv in thi case ha got length <num> .
probabl <num> .
and addit is trite becaus length is addit .
the length of two disjoint piec is the sum of the two length .
and now we have a procedur which allow us in principl to move beyond the set of the discret space , and to move into continu space .
to summar what have we discov here .
first , .
we have discov , against the odd , from a coin toss experi , admittedli a conceptu coin toss experi , a continu sampl space .
the outcom's conceptu of thi experi , take on a continuum of real valu , in thi case , in the unit interv .
the basic event of interest here , ar natur interv .
interv ar the fundament unit in the continuum .
and , how do we alloc mass or probabl to interv ?
well , we simpli make it , in thi instanc , proport to the length of the interv .
at the end of thi all , we've discov someth a littl unexpect .
we start with an experi with a distinctli discreet proven , toss a coin repeatedli .
and out of the ruin emerg a real number .
somehow , we have transit from a discreet set into the continuum .
thi understand propel the start of a new structur to handl problem in the continuum .
so let's begin again .
we're start with the coin toss experi , toss a coin repeatedli .
the sampl point of such an experi ar unend sequenc of head and tail .
and if we write zero for a tail and on for a head , we have unend sequenc of zero and on .
and as we saw , such sequenc can be identifi with a dyadic expans for a real number , in thi case on third .
and thi lead to a correspond , a dictionari of translat between the coin toss experi and an experi involv a continuum of real number .
our outcom now ar number which take valu between <num> and <num> .
now let's take stock right .
if we remov the , the super fluid detail here which is ad color to the game , the idea of the coin and the toss .
what we ar left with is a plain , unvanish real number .
the sampl space now is a continu space .
omega is the unit interv .
and formal , we'll write thi as the set of real number x where x rang between <num> and <num> .
the sampl point here ar number x between <num> and <num> .
what ar the natur event in such a set ?
now the moment on ha a continuum to deal with , individu point start lose their signific .
there ar just too mani of them .
but what is natur and appropri here is that the basic event ar interv of interest .
for exampl , the interv from a to b .
and natur now , we want to ascrib probabl to these event and to more gener event .
and how do we assign probabl ?
we appeal to the fact that the symmetri in the coin toss endeavor make everi quartil as like as everi other quartil .
each region is as like as ani other region .
and therefor , the probabl of an interv should be proport to it length .
in thi case , the interv a to b ha a probabl b minu a .
kei here is the fact that the probabl ar invari with respect to where the integr is .
the probabl onli depend upon the length of the interv .
thi , if you will , a potent understand of what is go on , so let's start again .
kei here wa it translat in varianc , probabl do not depend upon the interv posit , but onli on the length of the interv .
suppos we consid an infinitesim interv situat at x with an infinitesim length dx .
right ?
indic by the red bar in the figur .
well , what probabl should be assign to thi ?
natur , the length of the interv .
in thi case , that infinitesim length dx .
now , paus for a moment and look at their equat .
on the left , we have a probabl , or more precis a probabl mass , it's got weight gravita .
on the right , we've got a length .
now , to equat mass to length , there must be someth multipli length and what must multipli length ?
mass divid by length .
now suppos we rewrit d of x as <num> time dx .
dx again is go to repres length .
<num> must then perforc repres a mass per unit length .
and thi mass per unit length is uniform everywher at the interv .
of cours we're go to multipli thi mass per unit length by a unit of length .
and togeth , we obtain that mass divid by length , time length , give you mass .
now what is object mass divid by length ?
that is what we call a densiti in physic , and we us a sai , nomenclatur , the same kind of vivid physic illus here , to think of a densiti as someth which ha got unit of mass per unit length .
now , onc we have thi in hand , we can stitch togeth probabl by us addit .
let's start by take our interv and break it up into a whole bunch of teensi weensi littl piec .
a whole bunch of infinitesim piec .
well , we'll simpli write down that the sum of these probabl must then give us the true probabl .
now what's the sum innat clean notat ?
we sum over all these tini interv of the probabl of those interv .
of cours we're go to make these sub interv tinier and tinier and tinier .
and in the limit , you'll recogn the kind of transit we have into calculu .
whether you go from discreet to continu , sum segu natur into the real integr , and therefor , the sum , in the limit as these infinitesim interv becom tinier and tinier .
becom the integr over that the interv from a to b of what ?
of <num> time dx .
thi must therefor , in the limit , as the interv size becom tinier and tinier and tinier , be exactli the probabl of the interv a to b .
but of cours , thi is an elementari interv .
and you evalu it and of cours we get as we must b minu a .
but thi is a potent understand .
what we have done is repres an interv probabl as an integr , as an area under a curv , let's promptli consolid thi understand .
so , here again , an infinitesim interv of length dx ha got probabl <num> time dx , identifi <num> as a uniform densiti per unit length .
the probabl of the integr is then the integr of <num> time dx over thi interv .
let us introduc a function and natur we're go to call it the uniform densiti in the unit interv .
let's call thi function u of x , u of cours is for uniform .
it's a mnemon .
u of x take valu <num> in the unit interv and <num> outsid .
we're go to think of u of x as tell us someth about the mass per unit length at the point x .
how do we comput probabl ?
we simpli integr thi function .
littl bit , u of x is just a fanci name for <num> as long as x is between <num> and <num> .
off side of <num> and <num> , it is <num> .
the probabl is obtain but integr a densiti over the region of interest .
that give rise now to thi idea that probabl in the continuum can be associ with integr with area under a curv .
thi is a potent idea becaus now thi lead to the idea that we can perhap have other continuum experi with differ mass distribut for unit length .
thi is next .
we can edg up to the continu via a limit sequenc of discreet experi , much as we do in the calculu .
we saw for exampl , by toss a coin repeatedli , in the limit we engend a continu space , the unit interv .
now on can imagin other experi which don't quit so gratuit , pose at equal mass everywher .
and thi lead to a veri gener framework for experi in the continuum .
in all such case we can think of these experi as aris as limit sequenc of discret experi .
but it is frequent go to be the case that it is much simpler and easier to deal directli with the continuum .
thi process is much as we do in calculu where we look at discreet approxim to sum , and in the limit , we end up with the riemann integr .
these two interg come to no harm if she bear firmli in mind that all that is happen when we transit from a discreet experi to a continu experi is that discret probabl mass segu into mass densiti .
where you have mass per unit length spread over a region and that sum segu natur into their appropri interv , all els carri through .
posit , normal , and most importantli , addit .
so , let's launch directli into the set where we have an abstract gener probabl densiti function , for instanc , like the on i've shown you .
i've call thi function p of x to connect it to the idea of a probabl mass function .
recal for a mass function the argument wa discret , a set of integ .
but now we're go to deal with a function of a real variabl .
the implicit sampl space here is the continuum , the real line .
p of x now is a function of x if it is a quantiti to bonafid densiti .
what properti should it have ?
well natur , it's a mass densiti and therefor the function should be non neg everywher .
it would make no sens to sai that the mass densiti is neg at a certain point .
we do not counten neg probabl .
and it ha to be properli normal .
what doe normal mean ?
in thi case that the limit sum , the integr of the function is unit .
anoth wai of think about it is that the area under the curv is unit .
bear in mind here that your p of x connot a mass densiti in unit of probabl mass per unit length .
d of x multipli it is an infinitesim length .
and we have a mass of a length time length .
we end up in fact , exactli with mass .
ani genet function , p of x , which is nonneg everywher and ha got unit area under the curv .
constitut a bona fide probabl densiti for some chanc experi .
now , onc you have a densiti , what kind of chanc experi ar we deal with ?
let's take stock .
the underli sampl space is in fact a continuum , it is a real line .
and in set like thi , tradit compel us to us a letter rather differ from capit omega .
we us blackboard bold r to denot the real line , and of cours that just mean all real number from minu infin to plu infin .
we think of thi as a limit experi .
we think of thi , for exampl , as connot the amount of rainfal in a given dai , the rate of sunspot activ , the percentag of contamin in a reservoir , and so on and so forth .
all of these can be thought of as limit discreet experi give rise to a continu valu .
here is our sampl space .
the sampl point here ar real number , i should to adher to our convent , call it lowercas omega .
but convent in thi set compel us to us letter like x to denot it .
and so by convent we us uppercas letter , typic r , s , t , u , v , w , x , y , zed .
to repres chanc outcom which ar numer .
a gener such letter of cours is upper case x and thi will repres for us a gener outcom of a chanc of an experi which give rise to a continuum of possibl valu .
sinc we now ar deal with a numer valu it is natur to call such a sampl point a random variabl .
all right , so upper case x is a gener random variabl for a chanc experi describ by the probabl law which is induc from that densiti of valu .
what ar the event of interest ?
well , the basic event ar natur interv .
so an interv of event a is a form of an interv from a to b .
now , thi is a subset of the real life , a bona fide event , but the context here of an experi which give rise to a real number , add color to the pictur .
and we can describ thi event in notat graphic by sai , thi is the event which correspond to all outcom , random variabl , which take valu between a on the on hand and b on the other .
and thi kind of explicit write out of the event is visual appeal and of cours it connect well with our intuit .
we now want to assign a probabl measur to thi .
probabl here ar identifi with area , so we're interest in the probabl of the interv from a to b .
or more verbos , the probabl that a random variabl , the outcom of a chanc experi , li between a and b .
and we simpli identifi it as the area under the curv from a to b of the densiti function .
thi is exactli the kind of process we went through with a uniform distribut .
we can think of the integr of the right as elimin riemann sum by take the interv and as we did befor split it up into infinitisim piec .
ad up the probabl contribut from each interv in into infinitisim piec .
which is of cours the height of the rectangl .
a tini rectangl center at that point .
add them up , go to the limit , you get an interv .
now at thi point it's much easier to deal with the interv .
what about more gener event ?
well a more gener event is obtain by take variou subset and variou interv on the line and stitch them togeth like thi .
so now we ar go to have basic event which engend more complex event by a process of union , intersect , set differ , and so forth .
let's sai a is on such gener event .
i've shown it to you by three shade area under the curv .
we're interest in the probabl that your random variabl a chanc outcom land in the set a .
and how do we comput the probabl ?
simpli by stitch togeth area under the curv and appeal to addit .
the area under the curv of p of x in the region a is what we denot as the integr over a of p of x and thi exactli give right to the probabl of interest .
and all we've done here is we've taken a densiti with unit of mass per unit length multipli by infinitesim length and ad to get a total probabl mass .
natur a question now is , at thi level of abstract , thi is all well and good .
but what kind of function repres densiti in practic ?
what kind of function aris out of real chanc experi ?
we shall turn to thi next .
so , for our purpos , a probabl experi in the continuum is categor by a densiti function , a function , p of x , which connot mass per unit length , or mass densiti at the point x .
of cours , the densiti function have to be non neg , thei connot probabl after all , and thei have to have unit area , thi of cours come from addit .
you stitch togeth all the piec and you make the piec tinier and tinier , in the limit you should get exactli on .
what kind of function occur in practic ?
so let's go back and look at the veri first on that we encount through our coin toss experi , and thi of cours wa in uniform densiti .
thi densiti ha a rectangular function .
so u of x , u for uniform is defin formal all the whole line , but it ha support onli in the unit interv .
it take valu <num> in the unit interv , and is <num> everywher els .
it's manifestli non neg everywher .
the onli question then is , is it properli normal ?
and of cours , we've seen thi .
and to do a saniti check , let's run the integr through .
the integr over the whole line of u of x dx , well , the onli portion that contribut is the unit interv becaus u of x is <num> outsid the unit interv , and so that leav us an integr from <num> to <num> , of <num> time dx , and of cours that just give the length of the interv from <num> to <num> or in other word , unit .
so in fact , the uniform densiti is properli normal .
thi densiti , which put mass equal everywher is the natur continu limit analogu of a combinatori set .
and i'm give you for exampl a genet combinatori distribut on a set of possibl where each possibl ha got the same probabl .
in the limit , as you look at a crowd of point get closer and closer togeth , you end up with a uniform densiti , which ha got a constant mass densiti in a certain wager .
the natur applic domain for thing like thi go all the wai back to pierr simon , marqui de laplac .
and laplac thought of the uniform densiti aris in ani set where we had a continuum experi where there wa random choic in some interv .
now how do we go beyond thi ?
a natur exampl is the exponenti function .
the exponenti densiti , and of us the , the terminolog g of x here and that's becaus thi densiti is connect to a famili of densiti call a gamma densiti , that the student will see in tabl in part two as he goe along , so let's us g of x for it tempor .
it's just a name for thi function .
it stand for the exponenti function in the posit half of the line .
so it's a decai exponenti , and it's a <num> on the neg half of the line .
again , it's manifestli non neg everywher .
a look at the graph convinc you that , ye inde , it's , it's never neg .
and what about it area ?
well , the area under the curv is a veri elementari integr .
the integr of the function g of x over the whole line will have contribut onli from the posit half line becaus g of x is <num> on the neg half .
the integr from <num> to infin of e to the minu x dx is an elementari exponenti integr .
we run it through the mill , and out come exactli <num> minu <num> or <num> .
the exponenti densiti is also properli normal .
should paus for a moment and ask , have i seen a function like thi in the discret domain ?
cast your mind back to the upload six part on .
did you encount ani of kind function with thi kind of decai exponenti charact ?
if you came up with the geometr distribut , then inde , it's exactli the discret analogu of thi de , densiti .
and again the geo , geometr distribut as you might recal ha a , an exponenti decai charact over these discreet integ point .
where doe thi densiti aris ?
thi put more mass densiti near <num> , and veri littl mass densiti wai out for larg valu of x .
in other word , the probabl of take a valu somewher near <num> is rel high .
the probabl of get a valu , a random variabl , which take on a veri larg valu , is veri small .
thi turn out to be the natur model for random in set , where we have queue , where we ar wait for someth to happen .
the time between two arriv at a queue , thi turn out to be exactli the wai on model these problem .
still anoth exampl and thi on is not so elementari but it is familiar to us .
constant mention of the bell curv in common parlanc ha led us to common acquaint with thi mysteri object .
the normal densiti ha got a form which is like an invert bell .
the function is nice and symmetr and the explicit form is given by an exponenti with a decai quadrat in the expon , and a normal factor , squar root of <num> pi  , in the denomin .
by long tradit go back to gauss , we call thi function phi of x .
okai , now , it's clear that thi function is strictli posit everywher .
why ?
becaus the exponenti function is alwai posit .
so posit is trite .
it's not so clear that it is in fact properli normal .
now where doe that mysteri factor , squar root of <num> pi  come from ?
the veri moment you see pi  , you start think of a circl perhap , but there's no circl in evid here .
so , is it in fact , properli normal ?
inde it is .
but , at thi point , we've exhaust almost all the probabilist intuit for thi , and verifi that thi function is in fact properli normal to unit area becom a calculu exercis , albeit with a littl twitch to the tail .
and so i will defin that for a moment .
where doe thi aris ?
where is the discret analog ?
and thi is harder to sai .
the student might want to paus for a minut and sai among the exampl we saw in the upload six part on , is there anyth where the function in the discreet domain look someth like thi bell curv ?
if you came up with the binomi distribut , then inde we found a discreet analog of the bell curv .
it is not at all obviou that the binomi distribut on the on hand ha a function of form which give us anyth like thi bell curv for the normal densiti .
that it is not at all clear analyt , but it turn out to be deep and power process of analysi which goe back three centuri and led to some of the most potent and fundament result in the theori of chanc .
we'll come back to thi in our conclud lectur .
that so for the time be , the normal densiti aris natur in set where there's ani kind of central tendenc , when thing ar be brought into the center in some wai .
notic the normal densiti put more mass around <num> and rel littl mass far awai from <num> , yeah .
the bell curv turn out to be ubiquit in the theori of chanc .
and , it is ubiquit through the agenc of the mysteri central limit theorem , which veri roughli put , sai that if you add enough independ perturb , whatev that mean , the end result look approxim normal , look approxim distribut as if it were drawn from a continuum experi with thi charact .
these ar the basic densiti , the three fundament densiti , right ?
there ar mani other of cours , and in special circumst you'll encount differ function form .
gener we'll call them p of x .
thei're all character by the attribut , that thei have to be non neg , thei constitut a mass densiti , and that thei're properli normal to have unit area .
how do you comput probabl ?
figur out the subset of the real line that constitut the event under consider , and simpli look at the area under the relev curv in that region .
so the normal densiti is patent posit everywher as a function .
is it properli normalis ?
and to check if it is , we have to look at the area under the curv .
so rememb phi of x wa e to the minu x squar over <num> divid by the squar root of <num> pi  .
i want to integr thi and see if i get <num> .
the student might want to paus and see if she can plai with it .
i mean thi look promis .
i mean you've done exponenti integr befor and thi look like someth that with a littl bit of tweak should get you there .
and if you're curiou , paus and try it out .
now that you've come back .
you'll have realiz that if you tweak it the usual substitut just don't seem to work .
you keep get thing which ar not quit right .
the fastest wai through thi is to reli unabashedli on a trick .
it's a simpl trick , but it is not at all obviou that thi particular trick is go to work with a lot of experi with the normal distribut .
so , here's the trick .
if thi integr is to be <num> , then squar it is <num> squar , and that should also be <num> , right ?
the integr is clearli posit .
so , if i look at the squar of the integr , and i can show the squar is unit , then the integr itself must be <num> .
so here's a veri simpl idea .
it sound like a crazi idea .
but , but humor me .
squar the integr .
now if you squar it then what ar you do .
you're take the integr and multipli it by itself .
right ?
an ident copi .
but i don't want to mix up the variabl , right ?
so you have variabl of integr .
these ar dummi variabl .
right , so let's call the dummi variabl of integr for the first integr x , and let's call the dummi variabl of integr for the second integr , natur , y .
of cours these ar copi of each other , aren't thei ?
so now we've got two integr side by side .
thi is not alreadi look promis .
it look a lot wors than the integr we start with .
but again , bear with me .
let's assembl these integr togeth .
there ar two squar root of <num> pi's in the denomin .
multipli them to get a <num> pi  , pull them out of the integr , thei don't depend on x and y .
and thei have two exponenti function .
if you multipli two exponenti function then by the usual rule of expon the expon will add , and therefor thi pair of integr is the same as <num> over <num> pi  time a doubl integr of an exponenti function with expon minu on half of x squar plu y squar .
dy dx .
and you look at me and sai the man's gone stark stare , stare mad .
a singl integr's bad enough and now he's given us a doubl integr .
let's paus , someth clever ha happen here .
take a look at the integr .
in particular , the expon .
it's x squar plu y squar .
doe that ring a bell ?
doe that remind you of someth ?
mayb an activistict talgat memori .
mayb you're remind a rectangular to polar coordin convers .
if you look at a rectangular pullout transform then you replac the coordin x by r time cosin of theta .
r is a radial paramet , theta is an angular paramet .
y then will the r time sine of theta ?
then you find that r squar is exactli x squar plu y squar .
now here is where the cycl come in .
there is the radiu squar of a circl .
excel .
and dy dx becom r , dr , d theta .
and therefor , by go to a polar system , we obtain <num> over <num> pi  outsid the integr .
the integr over r run from radiu <num> to radiu radiu infinit .
the inner integr over theta run over all angl from <num> to <num> pi  .
the integr , well x squar plu y squar is exactli r squar .
it becom e to the minu r squar over <num> .
and dy dx becom r d theta dr .
we've made progress here .
becaus in the doubl integr we find a portion of integr doesn't depend upon theta .
it can come out of the inner integr and therefor we get an outer integr over r and an inner integr from <num> to <num> pi  of d theta .
of cours , the integr from <num> to <num> pi  of d theta is just <num> pi  .
and therefor we get now a singl integr .
multipli by <num> pi  .
we strike out <num> pi  in the numer and the denomin and that leav us a singl integr to evalu .
superfici it look like the integr we start with .
but with on critic differ .
there is a term r in front of the dr .
and thi immedi suggest that perhap a standard chang of variabl might work .
and inde it doe .
suppos we replac r squar over <num> by a variabl of integr , t .
then dt becom rdr and with thi chang of variabl , our integr collaps into the form .
an integr from <num> to infin of a decai exponenti function e to the minu t .
of cours thi is a complet standard exponenti integr and we simpli write the answer down .
we get <num> minu <num> or <num> .
inde as must .
so in fact the normal densiti is inde properli normal .
and thi analysi ha show us also someth about the origin of the mysteri squar root of <num> pi  , the demonit .
it aris becaus of a certain circular symmetri that is inher in the normal .
okai ?
with the concept of a probabl densiti under our belt , it is now time to test our understand of the concept .
recal that the idea of a probabl densiti hing upon two element , posit and normal .
the function , which is put a densiti , ha to be non neg everywher .
on can not have neg probabl .
and the area under the curv must be a unit .
onc a densiti function is specifi , much of the probabilist content and flavor is exhaust , and now it usual becom a matter of the calculu .
deal with the properti of a function and comput variou interv .
so , with thi under our belt , let us promptli test our understand on three possibl function .
i've distinguish them by call them p1 , p2 , and p3 .
and your task is to determin which , if ani of these , is inde a densiti .
paus the lectur , have a go at it , and come back when you're readi to see what the analysi unfold .
so , let us begin with the function p1 .
now , thi is a simpl enough function .
i've given you a polynomi form and it set and rang , and of cours , on can certainli integr thi .
and if you do , you'll find the variant of the curv is unit .
thi look promis , but as the mathematician , georg polya remind us , it is alwai wise to draw a pictur .
and if we do , and we examin the graph of thi function , it becom manifest that thi function actual take neg valu in set and rang .
and therefor , it cannot possibl be , whatev it is , a probabl densiti .
thi function violat posit and therefor it is not a densiti .
now let's move on then to the function that i call p2 and we promptli look at the graph of the function .
from the point of view of posit , thi is unexception .
it is clear that thi function is go to be non neg everywher .
it is <num> in the neg half of the real line .
anoth posit half , both x and e to the minu x ar posit function and therefor you get a posit function .
the question now is , is thi inde properli normal ?
rememb , the probabl of the whole space ha to be a unit .
is the area under the curv unit ?
of cours , thi lead to an elementari integr in the calculu .
and let me just walk our wai through thi .
so we want to look at the area under the curv of p2 .
now , p2 is <num> for the neg half of the line , and therefor the onli portion of the integr that contribut is in the posit half of the line .
and in there , the function is defin as x time e to the power minu x .
now , thi look like the integr of a product of two function .
and that remind us of an integr by part .
now , you rememb the integr by part formula .
the integr of u time dv is u time v , minu the integr of v time du .
identifi u with x , v with neg e to the minu x , and we're home free .
run the integr by part formula through thi , and we get two term on the right .
the first term evalu the function , xe to the power of minu x , at the limit point of <num> and infin .
and a look at a graph tell us immedi that at both limit point , the function is go to be ident <num> .
at <num> , x contribut exactli <num> .
at infin , x blow up , it is true , but e to the power minu x squash it with a firm hand .
and so we have no contribut from the first term on the right .
the second term , well , let's just reassembl it .
combin the two minu sign and obtain a simpl exponenti integr over the posit half of the line .
of cours , you might recogn here the exponenti densiti , but do integr doesn't caus us much distress .
it's a simpl exponenti integr .
we evalu it , and we observ that the area under the curv is exactli a unit .
we've discov that p2 is , in fact , a densiti .
thi is an exampl of what is call a gamma densiti .
it occur in the theori of queue .
it occur in the model of wait time for chanc driven event .
we will see it aris in a less mysteri wai when we get to tableau ten part two .
and we'll find a connect between these densiti and cue and the distribut of bomb hit in london dure world war ii .
let's now proce to the third exampl , the function i've call p3 .
we promptli plot it graph .
we find it's posit everywher .
it look a littl strang to be sure , but clearli , the function is in fact strictli posit everywher on the real line .
and the fact that it decai so quickli on both side give us hope that the area to the curv is in fact finit , and mayb if we're lucki .
ar thei good ?
have thei said their prayer at night ?
there actual is actual a unit .
now , let's go ahead and try to comput the area under the curv .
okai , so let's write down the integr of p3 over the whole line .
now p3 , ha got support over the entir line , so write down the function form of the whole line , and we get what look like a formid look integr .
you have an exponenti and a second exponenti in the export .
ouch .
but , no matter , let's paus for a littl bit .
what we have is an exponenti , and in the expon , we have a differ of two term .
recal that e to the power of a plu b is e to the power a time e to the power b .
we can separ the expon into two exponenti , and just write it out as a doubl exponenti time a singl exponenti .
now , thi look promis , right ?
admittedli it still look complex , but it is promis .
we might try a simpl chang of variabl .
and let us try thi without further ado .
suppos you replac e to the minu x by t , then dt is neg e to the minu x , dx .
and we see that the entir integr immedi simplifi .
the integr becom , the first term is now , in the expon , we have t , so we have e to the minu t of the first term in the integrand .
and then , the second term just becom neg dt .
that's beauti .
what about the limit of integr ?
when x goe to minu infin , e to the power minu x goe to plu infin .
and when x goe to plu infin , e to the power of minu x goe to <num> .
so the integr limit go from plu infin to <num> .
but of cours there is a neg sign in front of the integr , and the neg sign will just caus integr limit to flip , and we can rewrit thi integr as a game .
the common garden varieti exponenti integr we alreadi encount , we evalu .
and we observ that thi , again , is go to be <num> .
p3 is a bona fide densiti .
it aris in the character of extrem event .
thing like flash flood , super hurrican , crash in the stock market .
that is describ by the german mathematician , emil gumbel .
and he rightli remark that the river seem to know thi law .
it onli remain to convinc the engin of it valid .
all right , now , with thi under our belt , what have we got ?
we observ that a densiti is a function which is posit and is suitabl normal .
it anteced ar indiscret experi where we have a chanc experi which put mass at a discret sequenc of valu , and each valu then ha a proper mass attach to it .
when we segu to the continuum as a limit of discret experi , then mass segu natur to mass densiti .
and what then is a mass densiti ?
it is someth which ha got unit of mass per unit length .
mass is now scatter dens across a region .
the kei properti ar that it is posit , it is non neg everywher , and the area under the curv is unit .
so , thi give us a strong geometr feel for probabl in the continuum .
of cours , we pai a price .
and the price we pai is that an ordinari sum ha now becom an integr .
but thi should caus us no great alarm .
yeah .
after all , the sign for an integr , an s , an elong s , is there to remind us of it provid as a sum .
we ow thi to the mathematician gottfri willhelm leibniz , and on octob 29th , <num> , leibniz , on of the two father of the calculu , wrote these prophet word .
util erit scribit s pro omnia .
and translat from the latin , thi mean , it is us to write s for sum .
as the statistician , like steal , ha admir remark , few peopl have it so right for so long .
the proper abstract , the proper notat serv admir as a tool to focu thought .
and thi notat of leibniz for an integr remind us that what we ar appeal to is a basic princip of addit , a summat .
ultim , thi idea of addit run a remark thread all through the theori , and it's manifest in the continuum in the form of these limit sum or integr .
with the structur of on dimension densiti under our belt , we should promptli grasp some low hang fruit wait there for us to pick up .
okai ?
the structur extend natur and inevit to two and more dimens .
and let's see how thi work .
follow thi sage advic of hungarian mathematician georg polya , we should begin with the simplest version of the problem for which we do not yet have an answer .
and natur the simplest step up from on dimens is two dimens .
so what would compris a densiti in two dimens ?
now natur enough , borrow from what we know from on dimens , we will insist upon two properti .
posit on the on hand and normalis on the other .
we will think of a two dimension function where the variabl , natur and inevit we call x and y .
we'll reus notat p for now a two dimension densiti function .
and therefor a two dimension densiti function , p of xy satisfi two properti .
it ha to be non neg everywher , and the integr over the plane of thi function should be unit .
of cours there's an underli chanc experi we're appeal to , right ?
where doe the probabl come in ?
well the function p of two variabl stand in the rule of a probabl densiti in two dimens , where it unit ar of probabl mass per unit area at the point x , y .
and where doe the area come in ?
well through the term dx dy .
thi correspond to a rectangl , an infinit of rectangl of side dx and dy and dx dy us the area of the rectangl .
and therefor all we've said in the integrand is that when you multipli mass over area by area , you get mass .
stitch togeth the mass us integr as summat per leibniz and we get the probabl mass .
there you go .
now , there's of cours an underli chanc experi and we should crystal our understand by focus on it and make sure we understand in just proport how all these object fit in .
so , let's go back .
so we have a densiti in two dimens satisfi posit and normal .
what is the underli sampl space ?
well , natur we have two variabl .
and we're think of a composit experi where the space is a euclidean plane .
we could interpret it geometr as two coordin ax and the region describ by them , and algebra , in the notat which ha becom tradit for the plane , r2 .
so in thi context , a sampl space omega is r2 .
and r2 mean , algebra , all pair of point x , y where x and y rang over all real valu .
each perform of thi experi give us a composit experi where you have two trial which produc valu , let us sai x and y .
so a sampl point in thi experi is a pair of real valu , x and y .
tradit compel us to us uppercas letter at the end of the alphabet to describ these possibl for the trial .
the pair of valu x , y then constitut a pair of random variabl .
and such a pair in thi composit experi describ a sampl point of the experi .
what ar the event in thi experi ?
well rememb , event alwai ar subset of sampl point .
what ar natur subset of sampl point ?
well thei ar region of the plane , and the simplest , basic region we could imagin build upon the intuit of interv in on dimens will be a pair of interv , and a pair of interv give us natur a rectangl .
and therefor , the basic event , basic region , ar rectangl in two dimens .
we can describ it of cours geometr , or algebra , as a cartesian product of two interv which give all pair of point x , y where the first variabl x li in the first interv , the second variabl y li in the second interv .
now we want to go ahead and assign a probabl to thi .
how do we go about do thi ?
well veri simpli accumul mass by integr .
in notat , the probabl that a pair of random variabl compris the composit experi x , y , the probabl that thi li in a rectangl is the integr , the accumul mass of your two dimension densiti over that rectangl .
there you go .
simpl .
what about more gener event .
well a gener event in two dimens is some region , or possibl some composit collect of region in two dimension space .
algebra your region a is a subset of the euclidean plane r2 .
how do we comput it probabl ?
well , we could imagin tile thi plane with a lot of itsi bitsi tini rectangl .
and then simpli ad up the mass of each rectangl via addit .
but of cours , we'll want to make the rectangl tinier and tinier and tinier .
and in the limit , the sum becom an integr and what we have , the probabl that a random pair li in a design region a is that integr over a of your two dimension densiti function .
it is how all the intuit just carri forth .
have got two dimens under our belt , it is now clear what the gener structur should be for mani dimens .
right ?
the terminolog and the notat is go to now , inelect , get a littl more complex .
but that should not concern us , the basic idea ar clear .
what should describ a densiti in sai some gener number n dimens ?
a densiti n dimens is a function of n real variabl .
which satisfi a posit , and b normal .
the integr of thi function should be unit .
of cours there's an underli chanc experi , where doe the probabl come in ?
thi densiti function connot a mass densiti .
but now it's a densiti in n dimens .
in on dimens you have unit of mass per unit length .
in two dimens you have dimens of mass per unit area .
in three dimens natur you have unit of mass per unit volum .
and in ani dimens we will gener thi concept and sai thi is repres a mass per unit n dimension volum at a given n dimension point x1 through xn .
where doe the volum come in ?
it come in from the product of all those infinitesim term .
think of thi as an n dimension parallelepip whose side ar dx1 , dx2 , dx3 , dx4 , dx5 through dxn .
you multipli all of these valu out , you get the volum of that parallelepip and that is your infini , infinitesim volum .
mass per unit volum time volum give you mass and you're just stitch mass togeth , thei ar ad to d , and there you go .
what is the underli sampl space here ?
the underlin sampl space is a euclidean n dimension sampl space .
and again tradit compel us to write level maker , rn for the n dimens euclidean space .
of cours the notat look a littl complex for someon who hasn't seen it befor , but it describ a veri simpl object .
thi connot a composit experi , where you have n trial give you valu x1 through xn .
these valu x1 through xn rang over all possibl for real valu , and that give you an n dimension space .
tradit again compel us to write the sampl point for thi experi us uppercas letter , gener x , but now we have to describ which trial give rise to which outcom , and natur we'll us subscript to captur thi complex .
x1 denot the chanc outcom of the first trial , x2 of the second trial , xn , the chanc outcom of the nth trial .
and togeth we have a composit experi compris of n chanc outcom , x1 through xn .
natur enough thi describ in the parlanc of algebra , a vector , and therefor the sampl point in thi composit experi ar what we call random vector .
it is frequent us to compact notat and write simpli vector in bold font to repres an n tupl of real number .
okai , so now we have a right understand of what underli sampl space is and what the outcom ar , these ideal outcom of thi composit experi .
what ar the event ?
well natur event ar region in thi euclidean space .
so ani even a ha to be a subset of rn , and i've given you a fanci region just to show you a region could be anyth you like over which on can accumul probabl in some reason wai .
how do we comput probabl ?
well , probabl ar via addit identifi with integr .
the probabl that a random vector , the outcom of thi composit ideal experi , li in a design region a , is simpli the integr of your n dimension densiti over that region .
and there we have it .
so start from a process of segu from discret experi to a continu experiment limit , we get a on dimension random variabl , and from there veri quickli , we build up composit experi in two dimens and more .
all of these ultim ar probabl space , character in the continuum by these function which distribut mass accord to a densiti .
and the densiti , gener , ha got unit of mass per unit volum .
we have now come to our right understand of the concept of chanc experi in the continuum in on and more dimens .
it is now time to test our grasp of the concept , and see if we can extend thi to someth which is more gener , more broadli applic .
so , to begin .
i'm go to give you a sampl function , p , in two dimens , p of x , y of the given form .
is it a densiti ?
paus the lectur and have a go at it .
come back when you ar readi .
sketch pictur get more complex when the number of dimens increas , but with two dimens we can still make a good fist of fit .
if you have access to a good plot routin or a symbol manipul program , you can plot what thi function look like and if you do .
thi is what it look like .
it actual doe look like a gener bell , and that remind us of faint activist talk to our memori of the normal densiti , the bell curv .
mayb there is a connect , and inde there is .
now , to verifi the promin of thi function of a possibl densiti we ar to check two thing .
posit and normal .
posit is trite .
why ?
becaus exponenti function is strictli posit everywher so it never becom neg .
and our question then becom , is thi thing properli normal to unit area ?
now , it's go to be clear that the integr converg .
why ?
becaus the exponenti function decai so absurdli fast .
so the question now is , have i got the normal constant right ?
so , without further ado , let's set up a two dimension integr off the given function .
all right , we look at thi and sai , okai , the usual cours of thing when on is call upon to try to evalu a two dimension integr , we natur try to do it iter , first on integr , and then the other .
georg would sai , when you have two thing to sai , sai first the first thing , and then the second thing .
natur we want to do thing in an iter fashion .
now to do thi , we want to take the function and try to split it up into the influenc of x and the influenc of y .
and an examin of the particular form of the intergram tell us how we can go about do thi .
there's a factor two pi  the denomin .
we'll split up the two term each squar root of two pi  .
and then the exponenti break up natur into a product of exponenti .
and now is a product of a function of x and a function of y .
and these function look strang familiar .
and inde of cours thei ar .
each of them is exactli the normal densiti , the bell curv , the function we call phi , follow gauss's notat .
and so , the first term in the integrand is just phi evalu at x .
the second term in the integrand is phi evalu at y .
and now we can simpli separ the doubl integr into a product of two integr .
on involv the integr fi of x , the other for a differ variabl , the integr of fi of y .
but rememb fi wa a normal densiti .
no further work is need .
we've alreadi done the hard work .
the normal densiti is a densiti in on dimens .
and therefor it's posit , and critic it integr to unit .
and therefor each of these two integr is ident on .
and therefor we get on time on , or on .
and thi two dimension function is posit and inde properli normal .
and now we recogn it provid .
thi is an exampl of a two dimension normal densiti , a two dimension bell curv .
all right , a gener verif will proce upon these line .
though of cours , the difficulti of verif will depend upon how complet the function is , and how hard it is to do a particular integr .
but the basic idea ar clear .
now , what made thi particular construct work ?
but here is the kei idea .
the function i've given you decompos into a product of two function , each of which is a densiti .
that immedi give rise to an idea for a gener construct in ani number of dimens .
and so here without further ado , is the assert .
suppos i'm deal with an n dimension sampl space .
and suppos that each of the trial is control by , determin by , variou densiti function which don't have to be the same from trial to trial .
right ?
you know , the , the discret analogu is of throw dice where each die is differ weight .
in principl , on could imagin such an experi .
suppos we have a sequenc of on dimension densiti .
let's call them p1 after variabl x1 .
p2 is anoth function , possibl , of the variabl x2 and so on .
pn is a function of a variabl xn .
each of these is a on dimension densiti .
in other word each of these function is posit and integr to on .
the claim now is , if we simpli multipli all these function , .
well natur we now get a function of invari , call it p .
thi function of invari separ into a product of on dimension densiti .
the claim now is that if we do thi , for ani choic of the constitu densiti p1 through pn , we will get a densiti in end dimens .
the verif now is complet trite , right ?
let's write it down , if you have densiti in on dimens , if you multipli them you're go to get a posit function in n dimens , no problem there .
the question is , normal as alwai .
what is the n dimension integr of thi product ?
well , we simpli separ out the term and multipli out on .
dimension integr letter time n of them .
now each of these on dimension integr is the area under the curv of a on dimension densiti .
by definit , each of those area must be properli normal to unit and therefor each of the term of the right must be exactli on .
without ani further comput .
and you get a product of on , and inevit you'll get on .
so the product of n on dimension densiti , in fact give you a densiti in n dimens .
we should conclud with a slogan .
the product of densiti is a densiti .
okai .
at the heart of thi construct is thi kei idea of multipli densiti .
thi is a fundament kei principl behind thi concept of statist independ .
independ is a skein , thi thread which run right through the theori of chanc .
but i'm get ahead of myself , we'll come back to thi in a few lectur .
we've seen how the repeat toss of a coin engend , surprisingli , an outcom which wa equival to a point on the unit interv .
and from thi , we can think of a conceptu gedankenexperi which give rise to a continuum of valu .
and so these engend chanc experi in continu space .
we can think of these experi as limit sequenc of discret experi , but as alwai , it is go to be mathemat and conceptu more conveni to deal directli with a continuum rather than with a tediou process of approxim as a limit .
so , what ar these continu space ?
to begin , a chanc experi whose ideal outcom take a real valu is said to take valu in a continu space .
the outcom of such experi ar call random variabl , and thei ar usual denot by uppercas letter at the end of the alphabet , r , s , t , and so forth , and of cours , x is a gener represent for an ideal sampl point in such an experi .
if on consid a composit experi where now on ha a sequenc of trial , the outcom of the first trial is x1 , that of the second trial is x2 , and the last trial is x z , what we have is an order sequenc of random variabl , and thi give rise , engend a random vector as a sampl point in an n dimension space .
so far so good .
so now we have an idea of what the sampl space ar .
what ar the basic event ?
well , event natur ar subset of the sampl space .
what kind of subset ar natur ?
well , sure , in on dimens , an interv is a natur object to look at .
in two dimens , a rectangl perhap .
in three or more dimens , parallelepip .
individu point now lose their signific as mass carrier .
there ar just too mani of them in the continuum .
so the idea of mass now segu from point on to interv , rectangl , parallelepip , and so on .
these object , interv and so on , ar now the mass carrier in continuum experi .
to get probabl , we're go to have to stitch these togeth properli .
okai , so , and that come up next .
what constitut a probabl measur ?
in the discret domain , we put individu mass on element .
when we move the continuum , we segu from mass to mass densiti .
so , what a densiti ?
it is a function which ha to satisfi two axiomat principl .
on of posit .
the function ha to be non neg everywher .
it doe not make sens to talk about a neg probabl .
and two , it is properli normal , so that the entir space ha got probabl on , and we do thi by sai that the integr of the densiti ha to be unit .
so posit sai in on or more dimens the function is non neg everywher .
and normal sai that the integr of the function , the area under the curv in on dimens , must be unit .
and in more than on dimens , the integr of the function must be unit .
how doe on comput a probabl for a gener region ?
well , a gener region is some integr region in our space , call it a .
that is my event of interest .
to comput the probabl of a , we simpli accumul the densiti over the region in the limit , and of cours , that give us an integr .
so in on dimens , we have a on dimension integr over the region of the densiti function .
and that give you the probabl the chanc outcom , the random variabl , take a valu in that region .
and of cours , in more than on dimens we have an n dimension integr .
let us take stock .
we have now come to a rather rich understand of probabl space , at least in simpl set and how to construct them , all right ?
in the discret end , we simpli put togeth a mass function , which attach mass in accord with the axiomat principl of posit and normal .
but when you move to the continuum , the mass function give wai natur to a mass densiti in term of mass per unit length , mass per unit area , mass per unit volum .
and all the principl carri through .
the sum segu natur into a styliz limit sum , or an integr , and everyth goe through .
now , with thi under our belt , we've got a fairli rich understand of basic elementari probabl space .
where do we go from here ?
well , there's still some more foundat work to be done .
so our next step in the process is go to be realli , an understand of how side inform in a chanc experi affect underli probabl .
thi is the provinc of what we ar go to call condit probabl .
but befor we launch into that , there is a tempt avenu , a bywai which i find imposs to ignor .
and so we're go to do a small digress in on lectur in tableau seven .
given that we understand now what a model for a formal probabl space is , how doe that actual reflect itself in realiti ?
and we'll start with a veri , veri simpl and beguil question .
the toss of a coin is a veri natur , chanc driven experi .
but when you think about it , a coin is a physic object .
why is there anyth at all chanc driven about it ?
and what is there that allow us to suitabl model determinist physic phenomena by these random process ?
so thi is a danger bend , digress .
not that it's particularli hard .
it is not .
it is actual go to be veri elementari in term of the mathemat background you will need .
but it is in fact a digress from our main theme , in that we want to talk a littl bit about the impact of chanc on life .
and so with thi digress , well , we'll come back to condit probabl follow it .
tableau <num> .
is the outcom of the toss of a coin realli random ?
thu far in our develop of an abstract theori of probabl , we have appeal to intuit from commonplac chanc experi , to put togeth a foundat consist of three element .
first , an abstract sampl space of ideal outcom of a thought experi , a experi .
these ar the sampl point of the experi .
second an algebra of event .
and third , a probabl measur a set function which ascrib to event , number , in accord with three fundament axiom .
the axiom of posit , the axiom of normal , and most importantli , the axiom of addit .
so far , so good .
we've now got the begin of an abstract fulli mathemat theori of chanc .
but , how doe such an abstract theori gel with our common experi ?
how doe it fit with commonplac chanc experi ?
inevit we go back to the simplest set to get a right understand of how theori measur with practic .
and the simplest of all , of cours , is the toss of a coin .
and so , inevit we return to the toss of a coin .
let us consid what is involv in the toss of a coin .
we hold a coin up with some orient , we toss it , it land , and perhap it bounc .
at thi stage , on discern that the process is pure mechan .
thi is a physic experi govern by physic law .
what ar the kind of law which govern where the coin actual end up , and what it's final orient is ?
well , on can think about it and sai , well , the mass distribut sure should have some effect on the coin .
so how is materi distribut on and around the coin ?
the resist of the air might plai a part .
the gravit forc , which , could depend upon the altitud at which thi experi is conduct .
is it conduct at high altitud ?
is it conduct at sea level ?
the elast of the floor which govern the number of bounc , if the coin is allow to bounc .
and of cours , the initi veloc with which the coin leav the finger , and the spin or the angular veloc impart to it .
so these , on could discern ar primari factor , effect how the coin move , how it evolv , and how it end up .
but the moral of the stori is that a coin toss is properli view as a fulli determinist , evolv , dynam , physic system .
and if it's a pure determinist system , it is govern by physic law .
and in consequ , the outcom should be predict .
well befor we launch into an analysi of thi , it is alwai wise to simplifi the problem to essenti .
if on look at the situat as a whole , there ar sever factor which could conceiv affect the experi .
but not all of them ar of primari import .
for exampl , the listen might well agre that the distribut of a normal coin is reason uniform .
ye , there is a head embess , emboss on on side and there's a tail on the other .
but these ar minor variat in the thick of the coin , and at least , your first approxim , it might be not unreason to imagin the coin ha got a uniform mass densiti .
likewis , the air resist , on might pose it that over a rel short distanc of transit the air resist is not signific , not primari .
similarli , the gravit forc , well we could just suppos that we do the experi at ground level .
but wherev it is we can assum , again to first approxim that the gravit forc , the gravit acceler doe not vari significantli over the durat of the coin toss , over the height of the actual coin toss .
floor elast creat a variat on thi theme .
and we can elimin it again from consider for first principl by simpli sai we just catch the coin .
and at thi point we don't have to worri about repeat bounc .
now if thi is the case , then mani of these factor becom secondari .
but of cours it is veri hard to get awai from the conclus that two factor ar primari and will affect the outcom .
the first , the initi veloc , how fast is the coin move ?
what speed is impart to it by the flick of your finger ?
and the second , the angular veloc .
how fast is it turn when it leav your finger ?
so it appear that there ar two fundament physic paramet which affect the outcom of a coin toss , at least to a first analysi .
so now let us consid how these two element come into plai and how thei interact .
so let's go back now to a sanitis model of a coin toss .
here now we have a coin and we ar go to toss it , and we will simplifi the experi by assum that we toss it and we catch it .
it'll simplifi the analysi if we assum that we catch the coin at the same height that we toss it at .
thi is not essenti for the analysi but it'll make the algebra a littl more transpar .
noth is wise that unnecessarili complic exist and therefor without further ado , here is a sanit model of a coin toss .
we begin by imagin that the real coin is model by a thin uniform disk .
on side label head , the other label tail , as depict in your figur .
now , at time zero for the experi , we imagin the coin is place flat at a certain height abov the ground and we will call that the origin of a coordin system , height zero .
now thi is a matter of definit .
so let's sai that thi is now at height zero , at time <num> .
t , inevit , will denot time .
and now there ar two paramet of interest to us .
on is , how high is the coin at a certain time from my start posit ?
and , how much ha it rotat from my initi posit ?
now there's on more paramet which can add an element of chanc to thi and let's dispos of that , and that is the initi orient of the coin .
let us sai that we start with head face upward .
so now we've got an experi .
a coin at height zero , at time zero , with head point upward , is toss .
it is caught at the same height , a certain speed , a veloc v , is impart to the coin and we assum the coin is now travel straight upward .
inevit we call the height the letter y , becaus long experi with the calculu ha inur us to call the vertic axi y .
so let's call the height y .
and for similar reason the angl that the coin make with the horizont .
so the moment we impart a flip to the coin , the coin is revolv around a horizont axi .
the angl it make with that axi we shall call inevit , theta .
so y repres height , theta , the angl the coin make with the horizont .
of cours both of these ar function of time .
at time zero , in the initi posit with head point upward , the height y at time zero is zero .
the angl at time zero is zero .
so we sai , y of zero is zero , and theta of zero is zero .
now the coin is toss .
let us consid what happen at time t .
the coin is at a certain height , let's sai , y at time t .
and with a certain angular orient , theta at time t .
as the coin progress and come back down , we catch it at the same height that we had caught the coin earlier .
it termin time , when we catch the coin , let's sai is a time t equal to tau .
and at time tau , the coin is return to it origin posit .
it height is now zero again .
and when it height is zero , it angl howev , is not quit zero , not necessarili .
so at time tau , it form some angl theta of tau with respect to the horizont .
the hand of cours absorb the forc of the return coin , and the coin is then kept flat with the upward point face at the moment it return to it start point , the ultim outcom of the toss of the coin .
so at thi point we've got a coin which ha return , it angl at time tau , the termin of experi is theta of tau , and the angl determin everyth about what the outcom is go to be .
onc we have a sampl space in hand , the next question is , what ar the event of interest ?
event in the formal theori ar call measur set .
thi is a bit of a misnom becaus a measur ha yet to be specifi .
it is go to come and we call that a probabl measur .
but we will anticip the provis of the measur and call event measur set .
and we'll us a languag interchang .
so , for us an event is a measur set .
and what a measur set is , is a particular kind of subset of the sampl space .
a subcollect of ideal outcom .
now , natur we'll be interest in not just a singl event , a singl subset , but mani possibl conceiv event or measur subset .
so what kind of event ar of interest to us ?
well , natur enough we would like the entir sampl space to be an event , becaus after all if you perform the experi some outcom , some sampl point emerg .
we would also like to be abl to take event and combin them .
for exampl , i'd like to sai , thi event or that event , or formal the union of two event .
i would like to sai , thi event and that event , the intersect of event .
all i would like to sai not deceiv it , the compliment of event .
in other word , start with some basic event of interest to us .
we would like to construct and conceiv of more complex event obtain by the ordinari set theori oper .
now the simplest wai to prescrib thi is to pick two oper , sai differ and union .
and prescrib everyth in term of them and then all the other set theori oper ar inherit from these .
so we would like to conceiv of complement of event and consid those to be new event .
we would like to consid union of event and consid those to be new event .
and pool compel us to look at not just unit of two or three or a finit number of event , but possibl a countabl infin of such union .
now why an infin of oper you might ask .
sure in the real world we don't deal with an infin of oper .
now the answer is twofold , on , prudenc tell me that i should not a priori constrict my rang of possibl .
we've onli seen exampl where in a conceiv experi i can think of an infinit sequenc of event that could be of interest .
for exampl we discuss in tableau three the experi where on toss a coin repeatedli until two success face ar the same .
now , in such an experi , the experi could , in principl , be carri on indefinit without bound .
in such a space , i could conceiv of there is event of interest .
for exampl , the ibit that exactli four toss were seen .
of cours thi would mean that we obtain a sequenc like a tail , a head and two tail , or a head and a tail and two head .
well that is sure a bonafid event .
well i could sai what if five toss exactli ar requir , or six , or seven , or in gener n toss where n need not have a bound .
now you want to construct a new event .
the event that four or more toss is need .
well you see that thi event can be construct by take an infinit , innumer infinit union of the event that exactli four toss were need , or five or six , and so on , ad infinitum .
so poolen tell us that it'd be wise for us to expand the space of possibl to admit of a potenti infinit number of set theoret oper .
now the moment we have someth like thi .
it transpir by the ordinari rule of set algebra that immedi if i have a collect of event , then i can take set differ , i can take symmetr differ , compliment , union and intersect in ani order whatsoev .
and do a countabl infinit number of them and still get event .
the collect of all such conceiv , measur subset or event is what we'll call the algebra of event .
and we will denot it by the styliz , uppercas script letter f .
now , when you sai an algebra , we us the term advisedli .
we can do thing like union , which stand in the role of addit .
we can do thing like intersect , which stand in the role of multipl .
thi is begin to look like an ordinari algebra .
if it walk like a duck , if it quack like a duck , well it's got to be a duck .
if it add like an algebra , if it multipli like an algebra , then manifestli it is an algebra , and we will without further ado call it an algebra .
now formal , becaus we ar allow not just a finit number of oper but a countabl infinit number of oper in principl .
it transpir that what we're look at is , you can think of it as an algebra on steroid , it allow an infin of oper .
formal , such structur ar call sigma algebra .
the lowercas greek letter sigma drawn from the german zuma .
stand for realli a countabl number of oper like addit .
now thi is all veri abstract , and of cours , in the next tableau we'll start put some color and some , some rich structur around thi in the form of applic .
but while we ar build structur , it is wise and us to add colloqui languag to the pictur so that we can pictur thing easili , add color to it , see it in a comfort light .
so here is some notat and languag which make thi , thi abstract pictur perhap a littl more palat .
we'll begin , of cours , with the idea of subset of the sampl space .
so we have an underli abstract sampl space , omega , of which everyth is go to happen .
in such a sampl space i'm go to pick subset of interest , these ar the event .
we will us , gener speak , though again we will not slavishli adher to convent if it is wiser to switch , but in gener , we will us upper case latin letter , at the low end of the alphabet , a , b , c , d , etc , to denot differ possibl event .
and of cours , in such set , it is frequent us to draw a pictur .
a venn diagram can help us visual inter relationship between these set .
excel , now when on perform an experi .
some outcom , littl omega transpir , thi is a sampl point .
that littl omega could be insid some set of interest to us , an event of interest to us .
if that is the case , we're imagin thi chanc experi be perform , it's a thought , a gedanken experi .
if an outcom of the set aris from the experi then we will veri natur sai that thi event occur .
veri colloqui languag , but it just mean the collect of sampl point which compris that set a , which is the event under consider .
now , of cours if on doe the experi , some sampl point or the other will happen .
and therefor the space itself , omega , is what we will call the certain event .
the perform of the experi will result in some littl omega , but littl omega is manifestli an element of big omega by definit .
and therefor big omega occur .
it is certain to occur .
by the same token , in an inform vein , we will talk about the empti set as the imposs event , becaus the empti set ha got no element .
and so no outcom of the experi can possibl lie in the empti set .
now to go a littl bit further , let's take a look at interact between set and between event .
suppos a and b ar two event of interest to us , and repres schemat in venn diagram .
and suppos a and b share no element .
the intersect of a and b is empti .
a and b ar disjoint .
in such case we will sai colloqui , that a and b ar mutual exclus .
the idea here , of cours , again is veri veri visual .
is that if on conceiv a fulfil experi , and an outcom omega transpir , if omega is an a , then it cannot be in b , becaus the set ar disjoint .
likewis , if it is in b then it cannot possibl be in a , again becaus the set ar disjoint .
and therefor the occurr of the event ar mutual exclus .
everi us of ad , mutual exclus on occas as a synonym for a disjoint pair of set .
and now final of cours we can for gener event a and b .
we can conceiv of form the union , we will call in colloqui languag a union is a disjunct an or .
and we will sai , a or b .
we can conceiv of the intersect of these two event in colloqui languag we will sai the conjunct of a and b .
and given an event a , we can conceiv of it negat .
it complement , and we will simpli sai not a .
our model at thi level ha led us to the follow conclus .
start with the coin face upward , toss with a translat speed v and an angular veloc omega , it is caught at some termin time tau , when the coin return to it start posit , with some angl theta of tau , that it make with the horizont .
a student will recal from her high school physic class that the motion of such an object is complet describ by newton's law of motion .
if the listen ha not seen these befor , she might perhap be will to take these on faith .
these ar go to be veri simpl equat which complet character the motion of thi coin .
if for no other reason than to see how the stori turn out .
but in ani case , let's begin by consid the height the coin is at time t .
now the coin , start at height <num> , is subject sole to a gravit forc pull it down back toward the surfac of the earth .
there's an initi veloc v point straight upward imparti to the coin , and the student might rememb the follow famou formula .
the height the coin will be at time t is given by the equat vt minu on half of gt squar .
the quantiti g , of cours , a student will recal , repres standard graviti .
the standard acceler in free fall at the surfac of the earth .
the standard valu for g is appro , approxim <num> meter per second squar .
in ani case now here is a complet simpl algebra represent of the height of the coin at ani given time t .
we should veri quickli check to see whether the initi condit ar satisfi while at time <num> on the right hand side i get o and therefor the height of the coin at time <num> is as prescrib , <num> .
well , what about the height of the coin when it actual return to it start point ?
well , thi , we recal , is the termin time , tau .
plug in t equal to tau into our equat , we see that the height at time tau , y of tau , is given by v time tau minu on half of g tau squar .
but we ar consid termin the experi at the same height at which we launch the coin .
and therefor , y of tau is compel to be <num> .
but thi give us now a veri simpl equat that we can solv for the paramet tau .
tau , the termin time , is now complet determin by the initi veloc v and the gravit acceler .
tau is exactli twice v over g .
so if i know ahead of time what the veloc is go to be , i can tell you when the experi will be termin .
the coin will return at time 2v over g .
now what about the angl it make ?
well recal that the angl of veloc is constant .
at some omega , it's spin around the horizont at a certain speed .
now , when you have a constant spin then the angl that is cover is proport to time , and therefor the angl theta of t at time t that the coin make is exactli omega time t .
a quick saniti check at time zero .
it's initi angl is in fact exactli zero .
but now , here we come to the rub .
at time tau , when the coin return to the hand , the angl it make , theta of tau , is , of cours , omega tau .
but we know what tau is .
it's 2v over g .
and therefor , we come to the conclus that the angl that the coin make with the horizont , at the moment that it is captur , is <num> omega v over g .
a beauti , eleg equat .
gloriou in it simplic , and in thi simpl equat it carri a tale .
how doe the angl the coin make at the time it is caught , determin what the outcom of the toss is ?
well let's take a look .
so recal we have a formula that the angl at termin is twice omega v over g .
let's look at all possibl for the angl .
if the angl wa <num> , then head is point upward .
and so , i would sai , i get a head .
as the angl increas from <num> to <num> degre , you'll notic head is still point upward .
and therefor , for all angl up 'til <num> degre you will get a head .
now the moment the coin cross the <num> degre angl with the horizont , now we'll notic head point downward .
and it is tail that is point up .
and tail it remain from <num> degre all the wai up to <num> degre .
beyond <num> degre the coin becom head again .
and so we get <num> degre swing .
for everi <num> degre , we get head .
the next <num> degre we get tail , then head again , then tail , and then head .
and we get thi veri simpl descript .
write it in term of radian .
from <num> to pi  over <num> radian , the coin will end up show head .
from pi  over <num> to <num> pi  over <num> radian , the coin will show tail .
from <num> pi  over <num> to <num> pi  over <num> radian , the coin again show head , then tail , then head , and so forth .
so now we have an understand of what the outcom of the coin toss would be depend upon where is in thi rang of possibl .
the critic point , of cours , ar right at angl <num> degre , <num> degre , and so forth .
right at angl , pi  over <num> , <num> pi  over <num> , <num> pi  over <num> , and in gener ani odd multipl of pi  over <num> .
and so it behoov us to consid what the equat sai right at those branch point where we're trembl on the edg between a head and a tail .
so we want to solv the equat where theta of tau is exactli an odd multipl of pi  over <num> .
now rememb theta of tau is twice omega , omega v over g .
and therefor , in term of the paramet that initi experi , the translat veloc will be v , and the angular veloc omega .
we're look at the equat omega v is equal to pi  time g over <num> .
omega v is equal to <num> time pi  g over <num> , <num> time pi  g over <num> , and so on and so forth .
of cours our question here is , how do these initi paramet , the specif of v and omega , determin the outcom ?
well let's take a look at the first of these equat .
theta of tau is pi  over <num> or equival omega time v is pi  time g over <num> .
if we think of omega and v as free paramet , free variabl , then what you've got describ as you'll recal from middl school , the equat of a hyperbola .
and so you've got a line here , a hyperbol line correspond to all possibl for the veloc and the angular veloc , v and omega .
which give rise to exactli <num> degre in the termin coin angl .
and you know there's thi we got thi nice hyperbol line .
now , what happen if you have a valu anywher less than <num> degre ?
if the coin toss result in an angl less than <num> degre at termin , then you ar go to be somewher below that hyperbol line .
so all choic of v and omega which lie beneath the hyperbol line and ar captur by the ax , that entir region will result in a head .
and now a pretti pictur is emerg , right ?
now of cours , the moment you cross <num> degre , you start get a tail .
but then there's a next branch point at <num> time pi  over <num> , or <num> degre .
so it all becom clear that what we should plot is all the line at which the termin angl is an odd multipl of pi  over <num> .
and so here's what it look like .
so i'll plot it for you .
the hyperbol line , the , those valu of v and omega for which the termin angl is pi  over <num> , then <num> pi  over <num> , <num> pi  over <num> , and so forth .
and we get thi famili of hyperbol line .
now , what ar the result that emerg from thi experi ?
well let's start by imagin a coin toss with a certain speed v and a certain angular veloc omega , which is such that omega time v is beneath the first hyperbol line .
now in thi case the coin is go to show you head .
and therefor for everyth in that shade region .
between the first hyperbol line and your axi you're go to get a head .
now , what if your speed and angular veloc ar such that you lie abov that first hyperbol line and just below the next hyperbol line where the angl is <num> pi  over <num> .
at thi point you'll get a tail .
in fact , all combin of speed and angular veloc which lie in it second pale band ar go to give you a tail .
the next band , these combin of speed and veloc , and angular veloc will give you a head , and likewis , the next on will give you a tail , and so on and so forth .
and therefor , the red shade region in the curv correspond to combin of veloc and angular veloc , which will give rise to a head when you catch the coin .
and the unshad region in your pictur will give you point which result in tail .
now thi is now a beauti determinist pictur .
a coin toss then is go to give you someth which is complet predict .
where is there ani room for random ?
why do we imagin that a coin toss give us head half the time and tail half the time ?
if for exampl we have a high veloc and a veri small angular veloc , then we will be in the red region , beneath the first of your hyperbol curv .
and therefor the coin will give you a head .
well , becaus if you have a veri high veloc but the coin is bare spin , well it'll come back , it will not have spun veri much .
and therefor you'll get a head .
if likewis you toss the coin veri slowli so it doesn't go veri far but you toss it with a high angular veloc .
well the coin will not have much time to spin befor it's caught again .
and therefor you will still get a head .
if you increas speed and veloc in concert in such a wai that you land in the next band , you'll get a tail .
thi seem like there's no room here for anyth but determin .
well let's paus and consid , in a real experi , where ar we in thi figur .
rememb , your x axi here is your veloc v .
your y axi here repres the angular veloc omega .
now , measur of actual coin toss , when peopl toss coin like thi , will show that the veloc impart is somewher typic between <num> to <num> feet per second .
now in term of scientif unit , in term of metric unit , that's about <num> to <num> meter per second .
and so in your figur , thi correspond to that narrow band of veloc from <num> to <num> meter per second .
what about your angular veloc ?
on can imagin how to measur veloc , right ?
for instanc we can just toss the coin , catch it , and we can figur out what the veloc should have been .
the angular veloc appear to be a trickier thing to measur .
of cours on imagin , you know , if on ha access to sophist equip , on could us a laser beam , bounc it off the coin and measur variou paramet .
but on doesn't have to get nearli so sophist .
persi diaconi came up with a veri clever , ingeni idea for measur veloc of angular veloc us dental floss , and watch it unravel .
and via such experi , he conclud that a typic coin toss ha an angular veloc of around <num> to <num> revolut per second .
if you translat that into radian , that correspond to somewher around <num> to <num> radian per second .
and you realiz that our pictur is woefulli inadequ , becaus on the on hand , we have speed much larger than ar actual realiz .
on the other , in term of the angular veloc , we ar nowher near where we need to be .
and i'll show you angular veloc up to about <num> radian per second and what we realli need is someth like <num> to <num> radian per second .
so , let's go ahead and redraw thi pictur by foreshorten the veloc axi to the region veloc of interest , sai up to about <num> meter per second .
and stretch out the angular veloc axi to the region again of interest of around <num> to <num> radian per second and if we did that we'd get a slightli more congest famili of curv , all hyperbol of cours , which look like thi .
now notic , veloc ar run up to <num> meter per second .
angular veloc up to <num> radiu per second .
and the region of interest to us , the region where typic coin toss resid , ar veloc between <num> and <num> meter per second .
and angular veloc between <num> and <num> radian per second as shown in that narrow band in your figur on the right .
so natur enough , we should look at that small region and expand it , and look at it carefulli to see what stori it can unfold for us .
so let's take a look at that littl shade region .
veloc , but in <num> to <num> meter per second , angular veloc between <num> and <num> radiu per second , and now you notic the hyperbol segment which ar captur in thi littl window appear almost vertic .
thei appear to striat thi window in narrow band .
the shade region repres combin of veloc and angular veloc for which the outcom will be a head .
and the unshad region correspond to combin of veloc and angular veloc for which the outcom will be a tail .
and thi is what the pictur look like .
now you will tell me justli well akin there doesn't appear to be ani room for random .
you tell me what the speed and the angl of veloc is and i know exactli what happen .
so for exampl , if here is a combin of v and omega , it land you slap bang in the middl of a shade region , .
you sai , well the outcom is go to be a head .
but here is the rub , it is veri hard in practic to obtain exactli the same speed and the same angular rotat each time when toss the coin .
there is natur some variabl , some uncertainti in these paramet .
and so a natur question is how doe an uncertainti in the initi veloc and in the initi angular veloc affect the outcom of the toss ?
so the particular veloc and angular veloc .
in your pictur , it's about , slightli around <num> meter per second in term of veloc and mayb about , oh , around <num> radian per second in angular veloc .
now , suppos there's some uncertainli in the angl of veloc , the rate at which the coin is turn ?
now , see what happen .
so if there's uncertainti there then you're up and down in a certain region , but you never leav a band .
the band ar almost vertic here .
and so vertic uncertainti don't seem to matter veri much .
what if there is uncertainti translation in your veloc ?
oh , but now the band ar veri narrow .
and so even a small uncertainti leav a shade band and goe into an unshad band , then perhap goe back into a shade band .
small uncertainti result in dramat chang in the outcom of the coin toss .
now let's summar .
so , the outcom of the coin toss is , for the kind of veloc and angular veloc encount at practic , rel insensit to small chang in angular veloc .
but it is veri sensit to small chang in the translat veloc .
the shade region and the unshad region ar almost equal in area .
ani reason model of uncertainti will then tell you that you're as like to end up in a shade region as in an unshad region .
you conclud inevit that the coin toss outcom is head and tail with equal chanc .
remark chanc aris and it is rel insensit to the particular model of uncertainti for your veloc .
a pure determinist physic experi govern by newtonian law of mechan can be ascrib a chanc driven outcom .
becaus small uncertainti , regardless of the origin , manifest themselv into thi fair chanc that is observ at the end .
the student mai find it remark that thi elementari analysi of thi most basic of chanc experi , is actual of veri recent vintag .
a studi of coin toss along these line , wa publish by j . b .
keller , the american mathemat monthli , as recent as <num> .
quo vadi ?
latin for where do we go from here ?
it would be as well to step back , to get a bird's ey view , as it were , of the larger provinc of natur problem that lie within the scope of such investig .
now to begin , a student might sai , well , what if we alter the condit of the coin toss experi ?
the student mai well be will to believ that if the coin were allow to bounc instead .
that noth essenti chang in the analysi .
and if she ha some algebra dexter and a littl knowledg of physic , she might well be inclin to try the analysi herself .
the conclus remain the same .
under most normal condit , the toss of a coin appear to have a random charact .
the earli uncertainti tend to get wash awai in the process of actual toss the coin and captur it .
at a larger move , on could ask , what about other physic dynam system ?
doe chanc aris natur , in such set as well ?
let us begin again , with a histor import exampl , but on which ha been made familiar by ian fleme's , intrepid protagonist , jame bond .
in hi fond for the game of roulett in gambl casino .
here's a , an imag , an 18th centuri cartoon of a roulett wheel .
and here is a modern roulett wheel .
now , the actual mechan of the game ar not import for our purpos .
all that matter is that on ha a wheel , which is spun .
and a ball spin round the wheel and settl somewher on it peripheri .
and the gambler bet on the locat the ball end up in .
okai .
now , if on is a re , wa a , wa gambler , if on were to go to a casino , then on would like to have some kind of assur that the wheel were fair .
that the croupier could not by sleight of hand affect where the ball would end up , or the circumfer of the wheel .
is that realli the case ?
an analysi of thi problem wa actual undertaken just over a centuri ago in <num> .
and if you're like me , you like to get a flavor of what the time wa at that time .
thi is an imag of pari in <num> .
it's due to , it's and here's anoth imag of pari at that time .
sc ne de rue pari due to maximilien luce .
the year wa <num> , littl more than a centuri ago .
it wa a time of hansom cab , top hat .
it wa a time of empir .
but the mathemat problem were in a sens then same then as thei ar now .
an analysi of roulett wa undertaken by henri poincar , who at that time wa teach at the sorbonn in pari , and here's an imag of the sorbonn .
thi is actual a 17th centuri imag befor a famou fire at the sorbonn , but presum in the late 19th centuri the sorbonn had not chang in essenc .
thi is the univers of pari , the sorbonn .
and while poincar wa there , poincar wa a , a note topologist a man of mani part .
and while he did not publish in the theori of chanc he actual taught a cours in probabl .
and he must have been a remark lectur , becaus among the mani problem he analyz wa the game of roulett .
and hi lectur were publish in a book in <num> , the calcul de probabilit s .
it's a beauti littl monograph .
if you're curiou , you can get it onlin for free .
and it's a wonder histor object and also beautifulli written .
the problem ar engag and thei illustr a probabilist mode of thought in the most prosaic problem .
and thi wai of thought turn out to be veri , veri power .
now , poincar 's idea on roulett could be us in other set .
what other kind of game of chanc ?
what other set and practic do we see where chanc aris appar inevit as part of the process ?
but these ar in essenc physic system .
for exampl , you know , on can think of , ar the game of billiard .
mani ball on the tabletop .
on hit the ball against other ball .
the ball scatter .
where do the ball land up ?
up ?
thi is a complet determinist problem .
just as a roulett wheel where , given initi condit , on know exactli in principl where thing should end up .
but of cours with mani ball , even small variat in initi condit caus potenti dramat chang in where the ball end up .
now , if on goe to a larger scale , if on imag , let's sai , a room and instead of billiard ball , on ha , let's sai , atom or molecul interact with each other .
bounc off each other .
then again on end up with a determinist system , which is well describ by a stochast law .
in the , at the atom level thi wa famous done by none other than the luminari albert einstein .
in the year <num> the annu mirabili , where the four paper of einstein chang the world .
in on of them , perhap the least herald of them , einstein talk about how to measur avogadro's number .
the student might rememb avogadro's number from a basic chemistri class as repres a number of atom in a mole of ga .
how doe on measur thi mystic quantiti ?
einstein propos a methodolog , where he imagin mani , mani , mani atom particl attract with each other , accord to a common stochast law , todai we call that brownian motion .
now base on einstein's paper , j . b .
in pari , three year later in <num> , conduct veri precis experi which result in veri accur measur of our avogadro's number .
todai it's about <num> . <num> time ten to the power of <num> .
paren labi result in hi get a nobl prize .
so , there's actual reward in thi game as well .
move on .
if on lose to the game of billiard .
imagin throw a dart at a dartboard .
again , the outcom should be complet prescrib by the initi condit .
complet determin by the initi paramet .
speed , veloc , direct , and so on and so forth .
in practic there's uncertainti in where the dart actual end up .
if it were not , dart would lose , lose it appeal would it not .
and again , we have a determinist physic system with appar a random compon .
pendulum on a swing where variou paramet ar uncertain , for exampl , the mass , the length of the cord , the speed at which thei were sent in oscil .
the elast of the cord , game of dice , block and spring , and of cours , inevit , the toss of a coin .
and if we go clockwis around from upper left , what i've shown you is system of decreas complex , but all of which seem to have , ultim a chanc driven element to it , though all of them ar at heart determinist , physic , evolv system .
now poincar's idea turn out to be veri , veri power .
it wa built and expand on by eberhard hopf in the 1930s .
and given the rocket name , the principl of arbitrari function .
now , what thi is intend to , to commun is that the initi condit paramet , element that make up a physic system have some uncertainti in them .
the uncertainti might vari from instanc to instanc , but no matter what the initi uncertainti is , the outcom alwai seem to be regul accord to a common stochast principl .
and therefor , sinc there is no depend on an arbitrari initi condit , thi entir bodi of idea is call a principl of arbitrari function .
we could summar thi principl loos , but the gist of it is clear in these line .
uncertainti in our knowledg of mani dynam physic system tend to wash awai , as the system evolv .
in the long term , all these uncertainti morph into a common stochast descript of how the system is evolv .
and thu , regardless of the initi speed , that we impart .
and the variat in individu speed , from individu to individu .
at the end of the dai , the result of the toss of the coin , is a fair coin .
it is unpredict .
about half the time on get the head and about half the time , on get a tail .
thi lectur wa intend to show that even commonplac physic system could be suitabl model by chanc phenomena .
of cours , if on goe down to the quantum level , then chanc is inescap .
chanc is a pattern of fabric , of particl at a quantum level .
but even at macroscop determinist physic level , chanc appear to plai an ineluct part of the system .
in our next lectur , we'll now move on from the fabric of probabl , the axiomat foundat , to the next step , where we ask , how doe on incorpor evid that is obtain in the perform of a chanc experi ?
evid , inform on the side , about the outcom that aris .
how can on incorpor , in a veri systemat wai , such extern inform into the probabilist framework ?
thi will lead us to the import idea of condit probabl .
we have now built up two of the formal element need for the theori .
we have an underli abstract sampl space and a collect of subset of the sampl space , that we will call event or measur set .
to complet the pictur , we now need the idea of a probabl measur .
so , we should begin by ask , what ar the properti we would like a probabl measur to have ?
and , we should promptli reach into our bag of experi and see what intuit and common set tell us .
so , here a set of lesson from a frequentist's point of view .
let us go back to the experi where we talk about the first throw in the game of crap .
as you recal in a game of crap , we plai by roll or throw a pair of dice repeatedli .
in the first throw , we start with two dice and roll , and sum the face valu .
the game proce by repeatedli throw , ad the face valu and continu until it conclud .
imagin that we have <num> crap game go on at the same time , <num> game of crap .
and in each of them , the dice have been thrown for the first time .
here is now a list of the kind of outcom you might see for thi project experi .
we have ima , we ar throw the dice , and we're sum the face valu .
you'll observ that some of the letter ar in red and some of them ar in green .
and now let us put thi in the context of the game itself .
the underli chanc experi here involv reach and throw a pair of dice , and sum the face valu .
thi mean that the outcom of the experi could be view as an integ between <num> and <num> .
the sampl space , omega , is a collect of integ run from <num> all the wai up till <num> .
now with a game of crap , the first throw can be decis in on of two wai .
on could win on the first throw .
a win on the first throw mean that on throw either a <num> or an <num> .
or , on could lose on the first throw , which mean that on throw a <num> , or a <num> , or a <num> .
i've tag these in color to make them visual clearer on the screen .
now , on can also ask , what about the event that the game termin on the first throw ?
well , for the event that the game termin on the first throw , either on ha to win or on ha to lose .
win and lose ar mutual exclus .
thei share no outcom and therefor , the event of the game termin on the first throw , is a union of these two event a and b , and that give rise to the set of possibl , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and <num> .
veri well , now here ar variou event that ar possibl in thi underli space .
rememb the experi is , again , just throw a pair of dice onc and sum the face valu , and now we have <num> repetit of thi experi .
a natur wai to ascrib chanc to these event is to count and look at the rel frequenc of time these event occur in a long run of independ trial .
independ perform of thi experi .
let us introduc a littl nonc notat , a temporari notat .
let's us the greek letter nu to repres frequenc .
so , the frequenc of an event , we defin to be the number of time the event occur , divid by the number of time the experi wa perform .
now , let's begin with the sampl space itself .
well , everi time on roll a pair of dice , on get a number from <num> to <num> , and therefor , in <num> perform of thi experi , the sampl space occur everi singl time .
and therefor , the frequenc of time the sampl space occur is <num> divid by <num> , or <num> .
the sampl pic , space is certain .
what about the event that on win on the first throw ?
in the <num> game that have been begun , we notic that there ar exactli <num> protagonist who roll a <num> or an <num> .
and therefor , it is natur to ascrib to the chanc of win on the first throw , the ratio of <num> to <num> .
similarli , <num> protagonist out of the <num> threw a <num> or a <num> or a <num> , and therefor , we assign to leav it b that on lose on the first throw in crap .
the tent chanc <num> over <num> .
and what about the chanc of termin on the first throw ?
well , on termin if on trow , throw a <num> , or a <num> , or a <num> , or <num> , or a <num> .
and there ar exactli <num> such possibl in the string of <num> i've shown you .
well , of cours , <num> is exactli <num> plu <num> .
an outcom which trigger termin either belong to the event that you win or to the event that you lose .
and therefor , we find thi veri interest addit properti .
the frequenc of a or b is a sum of the frequenc of a and b .
three gloriou , eleg , simpl , spare properti in thi game .
the first , normal .
the sampl space is certain .
second , everi such ratio is a non neg number .
on cannot have a neg frequenc or occurr .
we have posit .
and that , if you have two event which ar mutual exclus , which ar disjoint , which share no element , then the frequenc of the union is the sum of the individu frequenc .
thi is addit .
these three principl now codifi and determin what a probabl measur should have .
so without further ado , what is a probabl measur ?
the probabl measur is a set function .
now there ar two word here , set and function .
we're all of cours , veri familiar with the idea of a function , f of x .
a real valu function of a real variabl .
long tradit and train in the calculu ha made us veri comfort with the idea of function .
well the probabl measur is a function but it is not a common or garden varieti function .
it's a function whose argument ar set .
thi function take event , measur set and map each measur set or event to a real number .
the domain of thi particular function is the famili of set of interest to us .
the algebra of set f .
and each set , thi function p assign a real valu .
all right , thi is a littl , oh , troubl .
thi is not the usual friendli kind of function we're familiar with .
but none the less , thi kind of codif of , of extract , will as we shall see shortli , captur the essenti idea of chanc .
bear in mind that we want to assign or ascrib an idea of chanc to event which ar set .
and where then inevit led to a process which to set assign number .
in other word , to a set function .
well what kind of properti should thi set function p have ?
well we draw from our experi and we saw the three fundament properti .
first , the set function p of a , in word the probabl of the event a , should repres someth like the frequenc that a occur in mani independ trial of that experi .
but frequenc ar posit , and therefor inevit we will want all our probabl to be strictli non neg .
thi is the fundament posit properti .
if you ever encount , due to a trite algebra error , a neg probabl .
you paus , step back , and sai , well , thi is a nonsens , and go back and find the error .
the second of the basic axiom , is that of normal .
the perform of a gedanken experi , our thought experi , alwai result in an outcom , in a sampl point from the sampl space .
and therefor the entir sampl space is a certain event , and therefor it is natur to ascrib to it the probabl of on .
now , i should point out that choos on for the normal is a matter of conveni .
it is a matter of definit .
thi is not someth which is given from a bow .
it is not someth which is inevit .
in fact , in ordinari languag , we us a rather differ normal .
can you think of what it is ?
if you said <num> , of cours you're absolut right .
we talk about the chanc of the weather turn , the chanc of rain be <num> .
the chanc of a flood be <num> .
the chanc of thi in term of percentag .
implicit in thi , in thi kind of languag is that the certain thing ha got <num> chanc the normal is <num> .
but of cours while talk about a subject we will frequent laps into colloqui languag and us word like percentag .
but , when we do calcul we will alwai revert to the basic normal of a unit .
the sampl space ha got unit probabl .
now these two axiom ar natur , inevit perhap .
the third axiom pai for all .
thi is a fundament addit axiom .
paus , and write it down .
thi is import .
it is hard to over state the import of addit in mathemat .
addit is on of the gloriou pillar which support the entir foundat .
it look right .
it is a statement of addit and you'll sai , fairli enough , well , we did addit in elementari school .
how can thi be so complex , so subtl ?
but , thi ha got ramif far beyond what it appear .
and we will see thi repeatedli through the cours .
thi is on of the cornerston principl , not onli of probabl but of all of mathemat , the idea of addit .
how doe it manifest itself in a chanc set ?
well , i should give you a word notat , addit is go to concern either finit collect or countabl infinit collect .
so when i write a set like a j with j run over posit integ , i could mean a finit set .
or a countabl infinit set with j run over all the natur number or perhap all the integ .
now , sai that such a collect , either finit or countabl infinit is pairwis disjoint .
if ani two set of thi collect ar disjoint .
share no element .
now if you start with a collect of pairwis disjoint set and you sai well let us form a new event by take the union of all of these set .
in other word , the union is a new event which occur .
if a1 occur or a2 occur or a3 occur and so on .
the principl of addit sai the probabl of a union of disjoin set is a sum of the constitu probabl .
and the notat when i put in a j , with all the dormant in the subscript , it mean let j run over all the possibl in the problem at hand .
so in thi case , j is go to run through a finit number of possibl or possibl a countabl infinit number of possibl .
imagin an abstract sampl space .
here's a venn diagram .
imagin a finit or possibl a countabl infinit number of event , subset in the sampl space , and suppos thei ar mutual exclus .
no two of them overlap .
you can have a finit number , let's sai two of them , in which case , we ar look at a <num> and a <num> .
and the union of a <num> and a <num> ha got a probabl , which is the sum of the probabl of a <num> and a <num> .
thi is what addit tell us , the whole is equal to the sum of the constitu part .
you can have a finit number , sai n disjoin set , the probabl of the union is the sum of those n individu probabl .
you could have a countabl infinit number of these a j's and thei ar all disjoint mutual exclus the probabl of a countabl infinit union of these a j's is a seri , a sum of the individu probabl .
now , thi extens to countabl infin is , as i said , prudent .
it turn out to be vital .
what it doe for us at a high level , is it allow us to proce for finit sum , which ar complet unexception , to seri , and it permit a continu , a limit argument to be made seamlessli .
thi is the kind of progress that on ha seen in basic calculu , when on talk about seri which converg .
it is in that context that these countabl infin becom us .
we now understand what probabl measur is .
it is a set function with three basic properti .
posit , normal , and most import of all , addit .
befor we move on and examin instanc of probabl measur in common situat and look a wealth of applic , it will be well to start with thi formal framework , thi abstract framework , and see what we can extract directli by simpl argument .
in other word , get the low hang fruit while we mai , okai ?
so , let's start with a veri , veri simpl question .
what can we sai about the probabl of the event which is empti ?
of cours , our instinct of reaction is to sai , well , the empti set should have zero probabl .
but you understand , in a formal theori , we can't simpli includ inform from outsid , as it were , right ?
think back to the axiomat structur .
what do we have ?
we have posit , the sampl space got unit probabl , and there's thi idea of addit .
nowher in there is a mention of the empti set .
so of cours we could inset anoth axiom , the probabl of the empti set be zero , for exampl , but it is not wise in mathemat investig to over burden an axiomat structur of assumpt .
theori ar most intuit and tend to have the greatest applic and swai when the assumpt ar spare , few in number , thing which ar easili check .
so , it is prefer to get result like thi that the empti set ha got zero probabl as a consequ of the axiom , rather than assum it a priori .
so , let's see what we can do with the axiom we have .
let's pick two event .
specif , let a be the event compris of the entir sampl space .
a is omega .
and , let b be the trivial event compris of the empti set .
of cours , these ar veri trite and banal in mani wai , but there ar certain obviou natur properti .
what if we intersect these two ?
well , anyth intersect with the empti set is empti .
and therefor , omega intersect of the empti set is empti .
or in our set purit languag , the set omega and the empti set ar disjoint .
ha , thi strike a bell with the axiom of addit , which dealt with disjoint set .
well , to understand how to us it , we have to look at the union .
but ani set , when it's taken as a union with the entir sampl space , will just give you the sampl space .
the sampl space contain everyth .
excel .
now let's see what we can do with thi .
begin with the axiom of normal .
the probabl mea , measur associ with the entir sampl space is unit .
but the entir sampl space mai be decompos as a union of omega with the empti set .
where these two object , omega and the empti set , ar disjoin .
addit immedi tell us then that the probabl of the union is a sum of the two probabl .
but on the right , we see the probabl of the set omega , which , by the normal axiom , must be unit .
and notic , just by churn through the normal and addit axiom , we've got an ident .
the book end on the left is on , the book end on the right is on plu the probabl of the empti set .
cancel on on both side and we ar left , of cours , with an inevit solut that the empti set must inde have zero probabl .
as inde , it must .
monoton is the second of the great pillar in mathemat togeth with addit , it explain and make transpar mani , mani , mani subtl idea .
at it heart it look trite , almost banal .
so here is a basic question .
suppos you have two event a and b .
rememb , event ar subset of the sampl space .
suppos addition that a is a subset of b .
what can we then sai , about the respect probabl of a and b ?
and actual enough , we want to sai that a ha got a smaller probabl that b .
and to begin , let's look at a pictur .
a pictur is alwai us as a devic to clarifi object .
imagin a sampl space , an event b and an event a safe ensconc insid b .
as a first step in the process .
rememb , all we have avail to do our analysi ar three posit , addit and normal .
so let's start with the event b .
we can decompos the element of b to two type .
if an element is in b , either that element is in a or it is not in a , but in b .
in other word , ani element of b is of on of two distinct type .
it must belong to a or it must belong to b minu a and so we have an ident .
we have decompos b to the union of two disjoint piec , a and b minu a .
manifestli , anyth in b minu a cannot be in a .
you have explicitli exclud , eschew , all the element of a in b minu a .
but now , b ha been decompos into a unit of two disjoint piec and addit immedi tell us that thi probabl must be the sum of the constitu probabl .
veri good .
but now , let's take a look at the second term on the right .
the probabl of the event b minu a .
the thing outsid a and in the analysi between a and b .
now we don't know much about thi probabl , except that it is a probabl .
and the posit axiom tell us that whatev thi is , thi must be non neg .
and therefor , on the right hand side , you've got the probabl of a ad to a non neg quantiti .
if we elimin , throw awai the non neg quantiti , it could onli decreas the valu of the right hand side .
and therefor , via the posit action , we come to the natur and again , inevit conclus that if a is a subset of b , then the probabl of a can be no larger than the probabl of b .
all of thi realli wa a codif of the basic idea .
that the hole is equal to the sum of it part .
an immedi consequ of thi is the follow observ .
ani event a is a subset of omega .
by definit , ani event ha to be a subset .
by monoton then , the probabl of ani event a cannot exce the probabl of omega .
but all probabl ar non neg .
so , in the bookend , we have inequ zero and the probabl of omega my normal is on .
and therefor , we conclud without further ado , that all probabl ar bound between zero and on .
again , notic that thi is intuit .
on is tempt to make thi a part of the axiomat structur , but it is not necessari .
thi is an inevit consequ of our spare axiom of posit , normal and addit .
monoton look realli trite , i , i admit .
but it ha deep and subtl consequ .
we will see some as we go along , but let me start by show you on ident , we can churn out us monoton .
thi is call bool's inequ .
their also call the union bound and the idea is what can you sai about the rel valu of of a union b with respect to the probabl of a and b .
so , in thi set , if we have a venn diagram , a and b ar gener set .
and so thei don't necessarili have ani inclus relationship , so you might have some kind of displai like thi .
where a and b live happili in their own sphere of influenc and thei have some overlap .
now let's begin by look at a union b .
now a union b is the sum total of the element that ar in a or in b or in both .
and to try to us addit , we try to find a decomposit of a union b .
and there ar mani wai we could do thi , but here is on wai .
we can write a union b as a togeth with whatev is left out .
and what is left out ?
well , it's that sliver , that crescent , b minu a .
and therefor , we decompos a union b as a togeth with b minu a .
now by the construct , it is clear that a and b minu a share no element .
in other word , the intersect is empti , thei ar disjoint set .
and by construct , it's appar that b minu a , that sliver is a subset of b .
that what you've thrown out is , of cours , what is common to a and b , the intersect of a and b .
now with these observ under our belt , we can immedi write the probabl of a union b , as the probabl of a plu the probabl of b minu a .
thi is addit .
but the probabl of b minu a is no larger than the probabl of b , but monoton and we immedi get a beauti and eleg inequ .
the probabl of a union b is no larger than the sum of the probabl of a and b .
onli experi will teach a student that simpl inequ like these ar more than worth the price of admiss .
right .
these ar much more us typic than ponder and condit bound in equal , which is quiet page of work of work to elucid .
let's start with thi and immedi see what els we can do with thi kind of idea .
so to begin , we've got bool's inequ .
the probabl union is no larger than the sum of two probabl .
what can we sai now about the probabl of the union of three element ?
paus the lectur and see if you can make headwai on thi .
restart when you're readi .
all right .
so , our idea is go to be to try to decompos a union b , union c .
and we'd like to us what we alreadi know about the probabl of the union of two element .
so let's try the follow decomposit .
group a union b togeth as on set and take it union with c .
of cours , we can do union in ani group we like whatsoev .
thi is the associ properti of union , right ?
just like addit , you can do them in ani order you like .
now on the right , you've got the probabl of the union of two object .
in drawn bracket , a union b with c .
all right .
bool's inequ ar appli to these two object .
think of a union b stand in the place of a and c stand in the place of b and we write down a sum of two probabl .
thi is just bool's inequ for two element .
but of cours , the probabl of a union b we know is no larger than the sum of the probabl of a and b .
and immedi , we've got a veri natur look inequ .
the probabl of the union of three element is no larger than the sum of the three individu probabl .
what about four ?
well , the argument unfold in almost exactli the same wai .
group three of them togeth into on unit , take it , the unit of that with a fourth unit .
us bool's inequ , write down a sum of two probabl .
and then for the probabl of a union of three element , we alreadi have discov that thi is no larger than the sum of three probabl and so bob's your uncl .
there you go .
and of cours , now we see an induct process at work .
and without further ado , we can write down the gener formula .
the probabl of the union of n event , howev thei're constitut is no larger than the sum of the individu probabl .
again , thi is a polit ag , so we need a slogan to keep us go .
so here's our slogan .
the probabl of a union of event is no larger than the sum of the event probabl .
thi is the quantit rule in equal , also call the union bound for natur reason .
rule in equal give us a bound for a probabl of a union .
but of cours it is , it would be nice , if at all possibl , to get an explicit formula .
an equal if you will .
so let's consid two event a and b again and .
there ar two gener event with no a priori relationship between them , in term of inclus of on and the other .
we'd like to find a formul which describ the probabl of a union b .
our approach is go to be , to try to decompos event into simpler object .
and then leverag addit again and again , right ?
so , here ar three us of addit .
let's start with the event a .
and let's decompos a into two piec .
a minu b and a intersect b .
addit tell us the probabl of a is a sum of the two probabl of a minu b and a to section b .
rearrang term , move the probabl of a minu b to the left , move the probabl of a to the right and you've got an ident .
for the probabl of a minu b , in term of the probabl of a and the probabl of a to section b .
we can do the same thing for the event b , decompos it as b minu a , union with a to section b .
the probabl of b the sum of the two probabl to rearrang term , and you've got an analog ident .
for the probabl of b minu a , as the probabl of b minu the probabl of a to section b .
how about a union b .
well , we can break it up into three piec now .
the segment a minu b , the segment b minu a , and the segment in the middl , a to section b .
and so , a union b is the union of three disjoint piec .
addit sai the probabl of a union b is the sum of the three probabl .
on the right , we've got the probabl of a minu b , the probabl of b minu a , two set differ probabl .
togeth with the probabl of a intersect b , the probabl of a conjunct .
each of those set differ probabl can be replac by the ident we have just discov .
if you do thi , and reassembl term , you'll find we have the probabl of a , the probabl of b , you have two occurr of the probabl of a to intersect b with a minor sign and on occurr of the prai , probabl of a to intersect b with a posit sign .
reassembl everyth and now we've got an explicit ident .
the probabl of a union b is equal to the probabl of a plu the probabl of b minu the probabl of a intersect b .
the listen mai well be forgiven for be singularli unimpress .
so what , so we did some manipul and out came a formula .
is it us ?
as it turn out ye , inde .
thi kind of decomposit ha subtl us .
at a higher level what you observ is on the left , you've got the probabl of a disjunct , of a union .
on the right you have got raw imag probabl .
and probabl of conjunct .
decomposit like thi ar us in problem set where conjunct probabl ar easier to comput .
we will see illustr of thi kind of idea when we introduc the idea the central notion .
of independ .
but for the time be , we've got an ident , which come out just by churn addit .
we call thi ident visual , graphic , the inclus exclus ident .
in other wai , if you're look at a union b .
you get to the probabl of the union by first ad the raw probabl of a and b , find we've over count , and subtract the intersect probabl .
we've includ and then we've exclud just enough to get an ident .
we can build on thi further and develop other ident .
the next segment is a danger bend segment which you could skip over at will , if you wish .
but show you how we can take someth like thi and effortlessli churn out more addit .
befor we launch into that , the reader should paus and do a saniti check .
when on is given a formula like thi , it is alwai wise to look at it from differ perspect .
see if it make sens .
doe it illumin someth you alreadi know ?
so for exampl you could ask what if a and b have particular relationship ?
what for instanc if a is a subset of b ?
what do you get ?
what if on of these set is empti of everyth ?
what if a and b ar disjoint ?
plai with these .
see what you get .
and when you're readi , proce .
now , have an inclus exclus formula in hand , let's see if we can tweak thi a littl bit more .
see if we can extract some ident .
thi is a danger bend segment , a bonu lectur .
sampl it if time and discret allow .
okai .
we have an ident for the probabl of the union of two event .
what can we sai about the probabl of the union of three event ?
of cours , in term of conjunct .
now , we'll have mani thing to plai with .
thei ar all probabl of a , b , and c .
the intersect probabl , a intersect b , a intersect c , b intersect c .
and also the probabl of the intersect of all three of them .
in set like thi , if at all possibl , on should draw a pictur , in the sage advis , georg polya .
and so let's draw a pictur .
a gener collect of three event , a , b , and c , have got complic interrelationship and sort of shown in the figur .
now , we want to deal with the union of the three event .
now , that's complic .
an idea of caus is to try to decompos it in term of , of disjoint element , and in such a wai that we can util the inclus exclus formula we've alreadi discov .
all right .
so let's talk with a decomposit of a union b union c in term of first , a union b togeth with c .
now , we've got two event .
a union b and c .
and we can appli the inclus exclus formula to those two event .
in thi case now , a union b take the place of a .
and c take the place of b , and we've got an inclus exclus formula .
a sum of two raw probabl minu an intersect probabl .
let's look at the element on the right in turn .
well , the probabl of a union b , we have alreadi discov an inclus exclus formula , so we just write it down .
thi next term is just a probabl of c , there's noth to discov there .
and then we have a probabl of a union b intersect with c .
leverag the , the distribut properti of intersect of union and rewrit the event as the event a intersect c union b intersect c .
and now , in the round bracket , we've got two event , a intersect c and b intersect c .
and we have the union .
it's all right now again for anoth applic of the basic inclus exclus formula , with now , a intersect c take the place of a , and b intersect c take the place of b .
we write the formula down .
okai , at the veri end , we've got the intersect of two object .
but we realiz that if you intersect c with itself , you just get c .
and therefor , we now have all the piec need to write down a formula for the probabl of the union of three object .
we write it down in term of a sum of three object , a differ of three object , and a sum of a singl object .
and we look at thi carefulli , pictori , you realiz that what were realli do is a game follow through on the principl of inclus and exclus .
we first add the element a , b and c .
we found we've got too much .
the stuff in the middl of the intersect is over count , right ?
and each element is over count exactli onc .
so , you subtract the three element in the middl .
but the moment you do that , then the intersect of all three of them is account for three time .
onc in a , onc in b , onc in c .
and subtract three time , onc in a to section b , onc in a to section c , and onc in b to section c .
henc there , we have to add it back in to make the calcul fair and just .
it's a littl bit like think about , let's sai , the wai a pendulum might swing .
like , let go , and it overshoot and so it come back , and it undershoot .
it goe up , it overshoot .
it undershoot .
it overshoot .
it undershoot .
and then final , it settl down .
and thi is exactli the process we're follow .
an overshoot undershoot phenomenon .
each time we overshoot , we take awai someth from it , and we find we've undershot .
so we go back and add some more element .
and eventu , we get exactli where we need to get to .
to listen , we can well see how on can expand on such a formul and talk about the probabl of union of sai n e , event .
and i'll let you have at it .
tableau <num> , part <num> .
characteris side inform in chanc experi ; the role of condit probabl .
thu far in our develop , we've start with a preambl on the natur of chanc around us .
build on thi , we took step toward the construct of an exumat foundat for the theori of probabl .
by consid chanc and common place experi around us .
we now have a formal mathemat framework .
and we wish to build upon thi .
as a first step , we will explor tributari from the main stream as it were .
to understand someth about the natur of the construct we have built up .
we shall start , by consid the natur of side inform on chanc process .
now , the idea of inform on the side .
about some aspect or the other , of a problem in real life .
it's familiar to us in vari and divers set .
for exampl , in public polici the idea of insid trade on the financi market ha , of cours , a disreput air .
it convei insid inform with a certain oh , social charg to moral charg flavor .
there ar other aspect of side inform , where on get innocu side inform about some process .
without necessarili ani kind of moral or ethic flavor .
and on can imagin variou kind of set like thi , where inform aris , relat to someth which is chanc driven which is go on .
and thi inform shed light upon the underli process .
our job todai is to try to come up with a formal , articul mathemat foundat for what should character side inform .
and , as alwai , we will begin with the idea of chanc in veri simpl set .
so that we can extract in , intuit for the problem and build upon thi a formal foundat .
tableau <num> , part <num> .
addit , the theorem of total probabl .
in our previou tableau , we built in a formal edific in fold insid inform into a chanc process .
and thi led to a formal definit of the notion of condit probabl .
when alli with the axiom of addit , thi give rise to a veri potent and power principl which sometim goe by the name of the theorem of total probabl .
let us begin by recapitul the kei idea that wa encapsul in the notion of condit probabl .
to begin , there is a target event , h , of interest to us repres abstractli in a venn diagram by that egg in your figur .
side inform is encapsul via the specif of an ancillari event a of posit probabl .
the condit probabl that h occur given that a ha occur is then defin to be the ratio of the probabl of the intersect of h with a to the probabl of a .
in word , thi is the proportion part of h that li in a .
if we clear the denomin by multipli both side by the probabl of a , then we get an equival formul which is equal evoc .
the probabl of the conjunct , or the intersect , of the two event , h and a , is given by a product of probabl .
a condit probabl of h , given a , and the probabl of a .
condit provid us , in thi perspect , a wai of chain , or build up , conjunct probabl , systemat via the condit process .
which viewpoint is better ?
well , it depend upon the circumst .
in the elementari set we've seen so far , we've begin by categor a chanc experi by specifi the sampl space , the space of possibl ideal outcom , the event of interest to us , the subset of interest to us in that space .
and final , a probabl measur , which in finit set or in countabl set , we specifi by specifi the mass function of atom probabl .
now , onc a probabl measur is specifi , then on can go ahead .
and us axiom of addit , comput probabl of event directli .
so in such set , it might be easier to directli comput a conjunct probabl .
in other set howev , the probabl measur is not specifi explicitli , but implicitli .
and in such set , it turn out that condit argument ar much easier to digest and comput , and then we think of condit probabl as an avenu toward conjunct probabl .
the perspect depend upon the particular problem at hand .
now , let us take the second of the two equat defin condit probabl as a start point and see how , by fold in addit to the process , a veri rich and subtl principl emerg .
so , onc again , we have a target event h , side inform encapsul in an event of posit probabl a .
now of cours , the pictur is evoc .
a is captur by the green shade region on the left of your figur .
but of cours the moment you specifi a , then , there ar suppl point left out of a .
thi collect compris the complement of a , and togeth , a and a complement , partit the entir space of possibl .
either an outcom is an a or it is not an a .
sinc a and a complement partit the entir space , a for sure i , for even stronger reason , thei also partit h into two part .
and we can write thi down formal us intersect as follow .
h can be decompos into two disjoint piec .
that portion of h that is common to a , h intersect a .
and that portion of h which is outsid a , that portion of h which is common to a compliment .
the union of these two piec then compris all of h .
the whole is equal to the sum of the disjoint part .
now thi perspect is allur , becaus now , we have manag to decompos h into disjoint piec .
and addit of probabl measur promptli rush to the fore .
the probabl of h then can be written as the sum of the probabl of the disjoint part .
the probabl of a , h intersect a , togeth with the probabl of h intersect , the compliment of a .
so far so good .
but , we now have a wai , a process of repres conjunct probabl by chain with condit probabl .
we'll replac the first conjunct probabl by condit probabl time the probabl of a , but it can replac the second conjunct probabl likewis , where now a complement stand in the role of a .
and now , we've got a chain equat .
look at it .
absorb it .
thi simpl structur carri subtleti and nuanc far beyond it appar simpl name .
the valu of such a decomposit aris if , in an experi , on can find a suitabl decomposit of the underli space .
and i shall promptli illustr thi for you , with a coupl of exampl .
we should begin of cours , with someth simpl .
and so we'll go back to on of our usual , our all regular .
or go back to the game of dice .
and we'll build on thi to build intuit and understand of how an ident like thi can prove to be profit .
and build upon thi with a second exampl of some subtleti , some nuanc , and some import .
so let's go back to an old familiar , a dice problem .
so here's the set .
imagin that on ha a pair of dice , on die with five red face and on white face .
imagin that thi on ha a white face but perhap toward me so you don't see it .
and on white die , on die with five white face and on red face .
imagin the red face is conceal from me .
we have two dice .
a die is chosen at random .
now , what doe that mean ?
i'll imagin that you have a fair coin , and you toss it .
and if it come up head , you select the die which ha five red face and on white face .
if it come up tail , select the die which ha five white face and on red face .
good .
onc you've select a die , you throw it twice and observ the face that show up .
the question at hand .
what is the chanc that for the chosen die , you're not told which it is , that given that the first throw show a red , that the second throw also show a red face ?
paus and think about thi for a minut .
see what your intuit tell you .
of cours , we ar go to put togeth a formal framework for an analysi of thi elementari problem .
now the problem set that i have given you can morph into other mathemat equival but formal differ set .
for exampl , we could replac the two dice by an urn and ball problem .
imagin on ha two urn .
in on urn there ar five red ball and on white ball , and in the other urn , the second urn , there ar five white ball and on red ball .
an urn is select at random , and then ball ar drawn from the select urn , sampl with replac .
given that the first ball drawn is red , what ar the chanc that the second ball drawn is red ?
we could replac the urn and ball metaphor , for exampl , by a coin metaphor .
imagin on ha two coin , on is bias <num> to <num> in favor of success , the other is bias <num> to <num> in favor of success .
a coin is select at random and toss twice .
given that a success occur in the first trial , what ar the chanc of a success on the second trial ?
set like thi inform a varieti of problem , and we'll see applic domain in epidemiolog , for instanc , which draw upon such simpl urn or dice model .
but to come back to our problem .
so imagin again we have our two dice .
we've select on of them at random and we've thrown it twice .
what ar the chanc that the second throw result in a red face , given that the first throw ha given you a red face ?
well , natur enough , we should begin by construct a sampl space for the problem .
now recal that on construct a sampl space by identifi all chanc driven element and then encapsul our understand of all that is uncertain in the experi , in some simpl and evoc notat .
now , in our set , there ar three element that ar chanc driven .
first , the select of the die .
second , the outcom of the first throw .
third , the result of the second throw .
and so to complet specifi a , an ideal outcom for thi experi , on ha to specifi a tripl of possibl .
the select of the die , on or two , and the result of each of the two throw .
let's sai that we call such a tripl , identifi it by three letter , x , y1 and y2 .
of cours , you'll notic there's a semicolon after the x .
thi is pure for visual purpos .
there's good notat and there's bad notat .
the best kind of notat is evoc .
it clarifi and bring to the fore the kei element of the problem .
poor notat choic obscur and confus .
now in our set we have three element , and to visual distinguish the differ flavor of chanc in the three element , we util differ letter .
x for the coin toss which select the die and y for the face of the die that result .
we us a semicolon in addit to separ these chanc element to visual tell us , there ar two differ piec of chanc go on in thi conjoin experi .
now the sampl space is the space of all such tripl where x take on of two valu , <num> or <num> , repres the two dice .
and y1 and y2 take valu either red or white , and we abbrevi it , of cours , natur , by r and w .
what is , or what ar the event that ar of interest to us ?
now , on consider , it becom clear that for our problem there ar two event of interest .
an event that the first throw of the randomli select die is red .
let's call thi event r1 , the subscript <num> connot the first throw .
r of cours connot red .
r1 , then , is a subset of the space of ideal outcom .
it's a subset , a subcollect of tripl , x , y1 and y2 , with the properti that y1 is red and x and y2 ar unfett .
similarli , a second event of natur interest in thi problem is r2 , the event that the second throw of the die result in a red face .
what is r2 ?
it is that subcollect of sampl point , that subset of tripl x , y1 , y2 , where the third element , y2 , is red and x and y1 ar unfett .
thei can be anyth .
now befor we go into a , launch into an analysi , into a calcul , we should paus and think about the problem .
is there a wai of partit it in a reason wai ?
and the notat make clear that there is inde a natur partit for thi problem .
is there an ancillari event of interest to us ?
natur enough , on consider , we realiz that the entir game seem to hing upon which of the two dice is select .
and therefor , we introduc a third event , an ancillari event of interest in thi problem .
let's call it a .
thi event is go to encapsul side inform about the problem .
let a be the event that the first die is chosen , let's sai the die with five red face .
and let a complement , therefor , repres the event that the second die is chosen , that is , the die with five white face .
we ar now equip to do a comput .
we have identifi two target event of interest , r1 and r2 , and potenti event which can function as ancillari event convei side inform , the event a and the complement of a .
what now is the probabl measur ?
now , there ar sever wai of approach thi problem , but perhap the most natur is to specifi the probabl measur implicitli via certain natur probabl we would like to associ with certain event .
so let's begin with the select of the die .
random select mean on is go to flip a fair coin , and if it come up head pick die <num> and if it come up tail pick die <num> .
natur enough , i want to alloc to both possibl equal chanc .
and therefor the probabl measur , whatev it is , should alloc to a and a complement both probabl on half .
veri well .
how do you proce ?
now onc a die is select , now there's no ambigu about which die is select .
i pick up die <num> with five red face and on white face .
now the chanc experi is veri , veri clear .
for thi die , the chanc of throw a red face is natur <num> in <num> .
there ar five red face , on white face , and therefor , the chanc of throw a red face , given that i have select thi die , is <num> in <num> .
and therefor , the chanc of throw a white face , the event a complement , given that i've select thi die , is <num> in <num> .
now what ar the chanc of throw two red in success ?
well , there ar five possibl for the first red face , five for the second red face , and therefor , by the elementari principl of count , <num> time <num> or <num> possibl for select the pair of red face .
out of how mani possibl ?
<num> time <num> , or <num> possibl for the arrang of the two face .
and therefor , the chanc of throw two red face in a row for die <num> , given that die <num> is select , is now <num> of <num> .
and by a , an ident calcul , the chanc of throw two red face , given that die <num> is select .
well , if die <num> is select , there's onli on red face , and there's onli on wai of throw the same face again .
and therefor , the chanc of throw two red face in a row , given that die <num> is select , is now <num> in <num> .
of cours , we can build other condit probabl along these line .
now with thi in hand , we ar in busi .
we've got at least implicitli a probabl measur at hand .
and now , we want to comput , sai , the probabl , the chanc that the first throw of the chosen die result in a red face .
paus for a minut , and see without do ani calcul , what your instinct tell you .
now , when you're readi , how do we partit the problem ?
the event r1 stand in the role of the target event h in our definit of condit probabl .
the event a and a complement stand in the role of ancillari side inform which condit the occurr of h .
and by the addit principl , we simpli write down the addit of the properti for condit probabl and we find we have a veri , veri simpl express .
comput it and we find there's a <num> chanc that the first throw result in a red face .
introspect sai that's veri natur .
you know , i have two possibl , and thei're so symmetr .
five red , on white .
five white , on red .
pick on at random .
there should be a <num> in <num> chanc of get a red .
and inde there is .
now let's take a slightli more complex question .
what ar the chanc that the first two throw both result in a red face for the chosen die ?
i've not told you what the die is .
what doe instinct tell you ?
well , raw intuit might sai look .
throw the die onc is as if i had a die with three red face and three white face .
i threw it onc and the chanc of get a red is <num> in <num> , or <num> in <num> .
if i were to throw it twice , the chanc of get a red should be then <num> in <num> , or <num> in <num> , <num> .
now let us see what our calcul give us .
now we have a more complex event , a conjoint event .
i want the first throw to result in a red face and the second throw to result in a red face .
we ar look at the intersect of the two event , r1 and r2 .
now r1 intersect r2 stand in the role of h in our definit of condit probabl , and we partit the space again by a and a complement depend on which die is chosen .
we write down the definit of condit probabl .
paus .
write it out .
make sure you absorb thi .
write down now numer what we have in our implicit definit of probabl measur .
work your wai through the fraction and we find that the chanc of see two red face in a row is about <num> .
significantli more than the <num> i might have naiv anticip in an equival experi , which turn out not to be equival after all .
thi suggest that there ar pitfal here .
there ar pitfal for the unwari .
that we should be cautiou in set up the experi .
and thi point again to the salutari valu of set up the sampl space carefulli , set up the event carefulli , set up the probabl measur carefulli .
we now have two probabl , the probabl for r1 and the probabl for the intersect of r1 and r2 , and thei're all prime for a condit probabl .
write down the definit of condit probabl as the proport chanc of r2 and r1 .
write down what you observ .
work our wai through and find , the chanc of two of a second red , given that the first throw wa origin red , is quit alarmingli larg .
it's about <num> .
that sound remark , given that on ani given throw the chanc of observ red is <num> .
thi sound strang and wonder .
how did the chanc jump from <num> to <num> ?
condit doe affect raw probabl in frequent unanticip wai .
of cours , onc we have an answer , we can look back at the problem and figur out what went wrong with our raw intuit .
on consider , we realiz that when a red face is seen , sinc a red face is so much more like if the first die is thrown than if the second die is thrown , the occurr of a red face suggest that there's a likelihood that the first die is the die be thrown .
and , of cours , if it is the first die that is be thrown , the chanc of anoth red face is quit high , and therefor , our raw probabl is increas via thi condit .
now thi is a salutari exampl .
it's elementari .
there's noth deep about it , but it serv as a us vehicl to reinforc the basic definit .
and the kei principl of addit meld with the definit of condit probabl via chain .
stare at thi exampl , work through the probabl again carefulli .
settl the concept .
these idea ar go to becom repeatedli us .
on of the thing that might troubl , a student is that , a probabl measur , perhap for the first time , specifi implicitli , via probabl act on event .
how doe on construct and measur , overal for the problem .
in other word , here's a discret problem , a finit problem .
there ar onli , a finit number of possibl outcom for thi ideal experi .
how doe on specifi a probabl measur for the problem ?
well , natur enough , i specifi a mass function .
how doe on specifi a mass function , than for thi problem ?
in other word , how doesn't specifi , atom probabl for thi problem ?
all right .
so let's take a small digress , make sure that thi kind of implicit specif , doe not lose ani gener , right ?
so let us , see how we can go about construct , an atom probabl .
and therefor , a mass function for the problem at hand .
figur these implicit , condit probabl .
so , let's start a new .
so again , where you have a sampl space , the event of interest , and our implicit , probabl measur , via the condit probabl .
we now want , variou atom probabl .
well , let's pick the target on at hand , that , the , die chosen wa die on , with five red face and white , on white face , that it wa thrown twice , and that two red face occur .
the sampl point correspond to thi , the atom , correspond to the tripl <num> , die <num> ha chosen .
r1 , that the first throw is red , r2 the second throw is red .
now , thi tell us that , thi event , thi atom , the singleton is obtain , by the conjunct of three event .
first , die <num> ha to be chosen , event a ha to occur .
two , the first throw of the die ha to be red , the event r1 ha to occur .
and final , the second throw of that die , ha to be a red , the event r2 ha to occur .
and therefor , the atom <num> , r , r is equival , to the conjunct , the intersect of the event a , r1 , and r2 .
all right , so now , we have a conjunct problem .
how do we comput thi ?
well , the moment we have intersect , we can think of chain them .
we ar , condit probabl , and addit .
in thi set , r1 intersect r2 , stand for each in our definit .
and , by write down the definit of condit probabl , we find , that the probabl of the , of atom <num> , red , red , is given by the condit probabl , of the two throw be red , given that , die <num> is select .
time the probabl that die <num> is select .
and now , implicit specif , write to our rescu .
we write down the fraction .
and we find the chanc , of thi atom , is <num> and <num> .
let's look at on more exampl , to settl concept .
what is the chanc that the atom , correspond to the tripl , for which , die <num> is select , the die with five white face and on red face , that the first throw of that die result in a red face , and the second throw of that die result in a white face .
now , thi tripl correspond to , the joint occurr of the event , that die <num> wa chosen a compliment , that it first throw wa a red r1 , and it second throw wa white , the complement of r2 .
and now we've got anoth system of conjunct probabl .
we'd write down the definit of condit probabl , where now , r1 intersect , r2 complement , stand in the role of h .
now what is a condit probabl of r1 intersect , r2 complement ?
given , a complement .
now think about thi for a moment .
die <num> ha been select .
r1 mean , the first throw wa a red , but there's onli on wai , is which a red face can occur , for die <num> .
r2 complement , mean that the second throw , wa a white face .
but , there ar five possibl for the white face , and therefor , overal , there is <num> time <num> , or <num> wai , in which for die <num> a red face could be follow by a white face .
out of how mani possibl ?
<num> .
and therefor , you have <num> over <num> .
repres the condit probabl of r1 intersect , r2 complement , given a complement .
the probabl rate complement , is on and two .
and therefor , we find that the probabl of the atom , correspond to the select of die <num> .
first for be red , second for be white , is <num> and <num> .
now write down for yourself , all the other atom probabl .
you'll first have to identifi , all the atom in the system .
all the ideal outcom explicitli , and then run through calcul along veri similar line .
paus .
do thi to settl concept .
and then restart the lectur , when you ar readi .
here now , is a final tabl , of the atom probabl .
first , how mani possibl ar there ?
well there ar two possibl for the first element , on or two .
there ar two possibl for the second element , red or white .
there ar two possibl for the third element , red or white .
there ar <num> , time <num> , time <num> , or <num> possibl for the sampl space .
in thi sampl space you have <num> sampl point , and then each of these now , ha the probabl list on your right .
you should verifi , that we actual have a bona fide mass function .
rememb , it's suppos to stand for , a probabl measur .
it's got to be , non neg , that is patent .
and it ha to add to <num> , the kei properti of normal .
as a saniti check , add up the column , and verifi that in fact , you get <num> .
thing ar in fact , properli normal .
of cours , on closer examin , you'll find there ar all kind of symmetri , in thi problem , and that's becaus of the wai i set up the problem , right .
you , the die ar in some sens , mirror imag of each other .
our next exampl is go to be , a littl more subtl .
and , perhap , a littl more intrigu .
our next problem illustr addit in condit probabl ha a classic proven .
thi is call the ballot problem , and here's a clean and simpl version of thi problem .
imagin that you have a class elect in a class with ten student .
and , there ar two protagonist who ar compet for the exalt role of class prefect .
sai , let's call them jane and bob .
jane pick up six vote .
bob pick up four vote .
so , jane win the elect .
imagin that the ballot ar count in some random order .
what ar the chanc that , as you begin a run count , start with the first ballot cast , what ar the chanc that jane lead at everi step of thi process ?
of cours , jane win the elect .
but , as you count , is it the case that jane took an earli lead and never relinquish it ?
now , here is a particular instanc of thi problem .
all right , so imagin you have ten ballot cast in thi particular order i have shown you .
start with a ballot for jane , then a ballot for bob , then a ballot for jane and so on down .
six in total for jane , four in total for bob .
now , let's start a run count on the left .
with the first ballot cast , jane's count is on , bob's is zero .
with the second ballot cast , bob pick up a vote .
jane is on , bob is on .
with the third ballot cast for jane , jane is now two , bob is still on , and you go on down , and by the time the tenth ballet is cast , jane ha accumul six , and bob ha accumul four .
clearli in thi particular exampl , bob ha manag to draw even with or even surpass jane's count at sever place in the count , though of cours , he eventu lose the elect .
now , we ar now talk about sequenc of ballot where bob never catch up with jane .
of cours , on can imagin combinatori wai of attack thi problem , but alreadi can sai that it is , it is not trivial , it is actual of some complex .
for instanc , what if jane had , let's sai , <num> vote of <num> and bob , <num> , what doe your intuit tell you ?
what ar the chanc that jane will lead it everi step of the count ?
if it's <num> to <num> , then everi vote is , essenti , a coin flip .
there's almost just a <num> in <num> chanc that a given vote goe to jane or bob .
in such a set , on might expect that there ar frequent chang , but that eventu , jane get her nose ahead and win , yeah .
if you were to put a numer estim of the chanc that jane actual lead at everi step , what do you think it might be ?
think about it for a minut .
all right , we will do formal analysi in a moment , but what doe instinct tell you ?
now , if on want a formal attack to the problem , then on might as well deal with it in abstract .
suppos jane get n vote in an abstract set and bob get m vote in thi abstract set .
natur enough , we will requir n to be bigger than m , els jane will eventu lose elect and bob will have sure caught up with her and surpass her .
so , let us ask thi follow question now .
we have a run off elect between two candid .
n plu m ballot ar cast .
jane get n , bob get m .
the ballot ar count in some random order .
and a run count is maintain from the first ballot to the last .
at the end of the game , jane win , n is bigger than m .
but , what is the chanc that the run count favor jane at everi step of the process ?
thi problem ha got an ancient and classic vintag .
thi wa analyz by w . a .
whitworth in <num> by combinatori method .
we shall look at the problem through a differ prism .
condit idea in thi set provid an eleg and beauti approach which unlock the problem veri elegantli , right ?
so , let's think about how on might approach such a problem .
now , befor we launch into the detail , befor we util the , the mechan which is part of thi mathemat subject .
on should alwai paus and think about the problem holist .
at the end of the dai , issu like these all concern problem solv , and problem solv demand that on understand the logic of the problem befor on jump into it and tri to util thi formula or that , all right ?
we should want a principl basi for how we approach a problem .
thi problem look rather complex .
how should on approach it ?
well , on suggest line of thought aris from the observ that thi is , in the class of problem which ar describ sequenti , on ballot at a time .
and , in sequenti problem , it transpir that a frequent efficaci method is to look at what happen at a given step in that sequenc .
and , typic us step to look at ar the first step or the last step .
you might be remind of the ancient chines proverb attribut to lao tzu from about the 5th centuri befor the common era .
where lao tzu sai , and transcrib veri , veri roughli .
a journei of a thousand mile begin with a singl step .
when you have sequenti problem , it is us , veri frequent , to ask what happen after a given step ?
sai , the first step or , perhap , a last step .
so , let's look at problem now , from a visual point of view .
n plu m ballot ar cast .
i have arrang them on a screen for you from left to right , label <num> , <num> , <num> , up till n plu m .
n of those ballot go to jane , m go to bob .
thi is a chanc experi , and so our first question inevit is , what is the sampl space ?
what is the space of ideal outcom of thi conceptu experi ?
so , let's begin with thi .
now natur , the sampl space consist of all such sequenc compris n js , j for jane , and m bs , b for bob .
all such sequenc , of cours we could enumer them , but if n and m ar even modestli larg , thi is a veri larg but finit sampl space .
what doe a random order of ballot mean ?
well , thi give us a probabl measur at hand .
the probabl measur here is implicitli combinatori .
it is compris of atom where everi atom ha equal probabl .
all sequenc of n js and m bs ar equal like .
thi is our mathemat model .
and , final then , we come to the question of , what ar the relev event of interest to us ?
natur enough , the question pose is the event that jane lead at everi step of the wai .
now , thi is easi to describ in languag .
but , when you think about thi in a mathemat framework , we realiz , thi is not at all simpl to describ .
we ar look at sequenc of n plu m , js and bs , and arrang in such a wai that the run count of js at everi on of the n plu m step , exce the run count for bs .
okai , now , in a given exampl , i can write down a sequenc .
for exampl , n js to begin , and m bs to follow .
thi clearli ha the desir properti .
jane take a massiv earli lead .
in fact , get all the vote up front and by the time the inert ballot is cast , she lead by n to <num> .
and then , bob plai catch up , but it's too littl , too late , becaus by the time the last ballot is cast , he's still onli got to m , which is smaller than n .
here's on exampl of a such a sequenc .
you could construct other exampl on a trial and error basi , but , clearli , thi is veri complex .
right , you could imagin situat where jane leap ahead and then bob catch up partwai and then jane jump ahead again , and bob catch up a littl bit more .
okai , thi look , is look veri , veri complic .
and ani attempt at write down an entir sampl's , an event from the sampl space base on these , on these line of thought .
it is go to involv signific complex .
let us paus and ask , ar there ancillari event of interest to us which could simplifi the problem , partit the problem ?
and , we will appeal to the wisdom of lao tzu and sai , well , what can you sai about a step ?
on step in thi journei of n plu m step .
it turn out , for thi problem , that a veri profit step to look at is , inde , the last step .
a littl introspect will tell you that , the first step is not like to be profit .
becaus if the event h is to occur .
if jane is to lead at everi step of the count .
then the veri first ballot must inde go to jane and there's no possibl .
otherwis , bob will take an earli lead .
okai . that's doesn't seem veri inform , there's no variabl possibl at all for the first step from the first ballot if jane's the lead at everi step .
but the last ballot seem to be rel unconstrain .
who doe it go to ?
well , there ar two possibl .
it could go to jane , or it could go to bob .
now , thi is suggest .
you see , the last ballot ha to go to on of two peopl .
it ha to go to jane or to bob .
we now have a wai of partit the space us an ancillari event .
the event as to what happen to the last ballot .
let us introduc some notat now , all right .
and us the notat we've been us throughout thi top level .
let a denot the side inform , ancillari inform about the game .
let a denot the event that jane acquir the last ballot .
the complement of a , then of cours , is the event that bob get the last ballot .
we ar now in place to put togeth some earli calcul .
well , let's begin .
let's take a look at the pictur we have develop so far .
all right .
to begin , we have , n plu m ballot , n go to jane , m go to bob .
if jane get the last ballot , then the remain ballot ar n plu m minu <num> in number .
and of those ballot , rememb jane get the last ballot , jane now get n minu <num> and bob get m of the first n plu m minu <num> ballot .
if on the other hand bob get the last ballot , then of the first n plu m minu on ballot , jane still ha to get n but bob now get m minu on .
thi is our pictur .
now let's see how we can milk thi .
rememb our target event is h , that jane lead at everi step of the count .
thi event ha got a certain probabl under our probabl measur , our combinatori measur .
we don't know what it is .
we would dearli love to know what it is .
of cours , thi is the object of the exercis .
but , whatev it is , it is go to depend on onli two paramet .
the number of ballot that jane get , n , and the number of ballot bob get , m .
in other word , the probabl of h , is a function of n and m .
let's introduc a littl notat here , let's call thi p with subscript n m .
so we'll call thi p of n and m .
keep in mind that p sub m repres the probabl that jane lead bob at everi step of the count .
when she get n vote , bob get m vote .
and the notat is valid for ani choic of n and m .
now , let us see what we can sai given thi choic of notat for the condit of probabl that jane lead at everi step of the count given that she get the last ballot .
now , onc jane get a last ballot , there ar n plu m minu on ballot remain .
she get m minu on of them .
bob get m of those .
and whatev the arrang , it ha to be the case that the run total over those n plu m minu on ballot ha to favor jane at everi step .
thi suggest that all we have done is reduc the size of the problem from n plu m ballot to n plu m minu <num> ballot .
from n vote for jane , to n minu <num> vote for jane .
from m vote for bob to m vote for bob .
and therefor , the condit probabl that jane lead everi step of the wai , given that she get the last ballot , the condit probabl of h given a is , our notat , p of n minu <num> , m .
recal p of n minu <num> comma m tell us that in an elect where on candid , jane get n minu <num> vote , bob get n vote , that the candid jane lead at everi step of the wai .
that's exactli what is captur now in our condit probabl .
what if bob get the last vote ?
in thi case , we have n plu m minu on ballot .
the first n plu m minu on ballot of these , jane ha to get her full compliment of n and bob ha to get n minu on .
and thei have to be arrang in such a wai that jane lead everi step of the wai .
and by our definit , by our notat choic , the condit probabl given the complement of a that bob get a last ballot is exactli p sub n , m minu <num> , a distinct with a differ .
thi is subtl , so paus , make sure we absorb thi .
okai .
the kei idea here is that by focus on that last element , what we manag to do is reduc the size of the problem to a smaller problem of the same type .
onc we have thi in place , we have all the element need to put thing togeth into a beauti formul .
okai .
of cours , we now want to need to understand someth about the natur of the site inform , the ancillari event base on which we ar comput these condit probabl .
and here's where the art choic of partit come to the fall .
by look at that last tip , it becom easi to see what the chanc of the last ballot go to on or the other candid is .
let's begin at jane .
what is the probabl that jane get the last ballot ?
well , thi is simpl enough .
the last ballot now is fix to be j , that leav m plu m minu on ballot .
of those m plu m minu on ballot , m belong to bob .
and the number of wai of arrang m bs and n minu <num> js in the first n plu m minu <num> ballot is n plu m minu <num> choos m .
how mani wai of there ar of arrang m vote for bob in total ?
well , there ar n plu m ballot .
and bob can be the m ballot for bob can be in ani of m locat .
that's n m , choos m .
we take a ratio .
simplifi the binomi coeffici , and we get n over n m .
veri simpl .
we paus .
i sai , is thi reason ?
of cours , it is .
there ar n m ballot .
the chanc that a chosen ballot goe to jane isn't actual enough .
the proport number of ballot for jane out of the total , n over n plu m .
what ar the chanc the last ballot goe to bob ?
well , thi is the event , the compliment of a .
and of cours , we could us a similar calcul , or simpli appeal to addit and subtract the probabl of a from <num> .
and we find thi is , again , veri intuit , veri natur , m over n plu m .
all the raw materi now ar at hand .
we've got second draw probabl , the probabl of our side inform , our ancillari event .
we also have variou condit probabl , albeit in term of the still , awkward , strang notat that we have creat .
well , let's put thi all togeth and see where we end up .
we ar interest in the probabl of the event , h .
that gene lead at everi step of the count when she get n ballot and bob get m ballot .
by addit , in conjunct with chain uncondit probabl , we can write the probabl of h by condit first on the occurr of a , that jame get the last ballot .
and then , by condit on a complement that bob get a last ballot .
on your left , is the probabl that we have call p sub n m .
it depend on cours on n and m .
on the right , we have a decomposit , which is the first condit probabl of h given a is p of n minu <num> comma m .
a ha got probabl n over n plu m .
the second condit probabl p of h given he complement of a is p of n comma m minu <num> .
and in the probabl of a complement is m over n plu m .
thi is look complex , but we've actual made great stride .
you see , on the left is the target , an express in term of the n and m given to us .
on the right is an express involv fix ratio , involv an n and m , and term that depend upon n and m for smaller valu of n and m .
as a high level principl , thi is veri import .
we've taken a complex problem , .
and in on step , reduc it to an amalgam of smaller problem .
thi give us hope .
now , befor we go on and try to solv thi , such an express hold for a sudden rang of valu of m and n .
which rang of valu ?
well , m ha to be at least <num> .
and n ha to be larger than m .
what we've done is construct a recurr with a rang of valid .
now , you mai have experi with recurr argument in and duct argument .
recurr aris , for exampl , thing like binomi coeffici and a varieti of other set .
a familiar , import on is that of the fibonacci sequenc .
but in gener , to solv a recurr of thi natur , on need boundari condit , all right .
and so what happen at boundari valu for n and m ?
and these ar easi to intuit .
what can we sai about p of n and m , for exampl , when m is bigger than n ?
well natur , if , m , is as big as , n , or larger , then the chanc that jane will lead at everi step of the wai is zero , becaus sooner or later , bob will catch up with jane's count .
what if then a zero , what if bob , the poor unfortun bob get no vote .
then as long as jane get ani vote , then she will take a lead and she will never relinquish it .
the chanc is certain .
thi give us boundari condit .
now togeth , an recurr with a rang of valid and boundari condit give us all the tool need to solv the problem .
at thi point , we've exhaust all the chanc to the element for the problem .
we ar now left with a calculu problem , right ?
a question of solv for a doubl index sequenc satisfi a certain recurr definit with certain boundari condit .
but , of cours , now we don't want to leav it at thi point .
but we do want to carri it through to see what the answer is and see whether it comport with intuit .
so , let's spend a slide on build up a solut for thi problem .
here is a recurr .
we have a , a recurr for p of n and m , in term of p of n minu <num> and m , and p of n and m minu <num> .
we have certain boundari condit .
now , .
thi give us a two dimension arrai of valu p and n .
the boundari ar specifi for us .
so here's what we have .
ax n and m , start at the origin and increas through posit integ .
the boundari condit tell us that along the y axi , the probabl ar <num> becaus m exce n .
along the x axi , for posit n , the probabl is <num> becaus if bob get no good , jane alwai lead .
and in fact , everywher along a diagon , a <num> degre diagon , the probabl ar <num> .
so everyth at a diagon and abov , you have <num> probabl , all right .
these ar what the boundari condit give us .
now what about the rest of the valu , okai ?
of cours , thi is the million dollar question .
so what if n is <num> and m is <num> ?
we want p of <num> , <num> .
thi wa our origin problem .
or modifi problem .
what if n is <num> and m is <num> ?
well that's somewher in the wedg out there , and that's what we want to determin .
what doe a recurr tell us ?
the recurr tell us that if we want to look at a particular n and m valu .
the probabl of pn , m is determin by two other probabl .
a p valu directli below it correspond to n and m minu <num> .
a p valu to is left correspond to n minu <num> and m .
if i know these two p valu , call them earlier p valu .
togeth , thei allow us to deduc our target's p valu through a .
process of aggreg , okai .
thi mean that we build up everyth in that wedg via thi recurr .
well , let's build up some idea of how we're go to do thi , right .
so let's start with the simplest non trivial case .
let's look at the case where n is <num> and m is <num> .
that's the littl grei triangl we're look at .
the valu south of and west of the desir valu <num> , <num> will inform the valu at <num> , <num> .
let's put it togeth .
well , we know the valu to the south and to the west .
thei ar given by the boundari condit .
throw them into in a relationship , and out come an answer , oh beauti .
now , the chanc of jane lead bob , everi step of the wai , when she get two vote and bob get on vote is <num> in <num> .
now thi is so simpl that you can work out all possibl arrang and verifi thi for yourself .
oh , veri good .
well , what about the next step ?
well what can we sai if jane get three vote and bob get on vote ?
well , we build up it again from the point south and west of <num> comma <num> .
south of <num> , <num> is a valu .
<num> , <num> , which is certain .
worst of <num> , <num> is a valu correspond to <num> , <num> , but we've just calcul thi probabl .
we plug it in .
we evalu it and we find it's <num> and <num> .
curiou error , curiou error , as alic remark .
if we look at the next valu , n is <num> and bob is <num> , and , and n is <num> .
again , the valu south and west of these valu will inform the target valu , we plug it in and we find it's <num> and <num> .
thi look quit beguil .
in fact , as you progress along the line , n equal to <num> .
it look like the probabl ar increas like n minu <num> over n plu <num> .
that's veri interest .
now let's try a differ valu for m , sai m equal to <num> .
what if n is <num> and m is <num> ?
again , the point south .
is n is <num> and m is <num> .
oh , but we know thi valu .
the point to the west is n is <num> and m is <num> .
oh , but we know thi valu as well .
plug it in and we now have a new probabl , <num> in <num> .
what about the point <num> , <num> ?
jane get four vote , bob get two vote .
pro , go through the same process , we now find it's <num> and <num> .
now we can see , we have a systemat process .
we can popul for ani n valu , all valu for n .
then we keep do thi until we fill up everyth in the wedg , go out as far as we need to .
and if we do that , we end up with thi arrai of valu .
at least at thi level we have a numer method of get to ani n , m valu .
in particular , we can read off .
the probabl p of <num> , <num> in your screen will tell you <num> , <num> ha a chanc of <num> in <num> or <num> in <num> .
there's a <num> chanc that in the origin problem , jane will lead bob everi step of the wai .
she get six vote , bob get four vote .
what about <num> , <num> ?
well we could , have to far enough along thi wedg until we get to <num> , <num> but it would be nice wouldn't it , if we had an explicit formula for what p of n and m is .
now if you look at thi and stare at it long enough , you will see a pattern emerg .
okai ?
and the pattern give you a conjectur for what the answer might be .
p of n , m appear to take a particularli simpl and beguil form .
the ratio of n minu m to n plu m when n is bigger than m .
of cours , on shouldn't believ a formula just becaus it appear on screen or in a book .
right ?
on should verifi it to make sure we believ the structur .
so , let's take a look at how we might verifi thi .
here is a project , a put answer .
p of n , m is n minu m over n plu m .
and there's a recurr .
the pof n , m need to satisfi .
to verifi it , let us see if the left hand side is in fact , equal to the right hand side .
on the left , i have n and m in plai .
on the right , i have two term , on involv n minu <num> and m and on involv n and m minu <num> .
if our formula is valid , we plug in and we get fraction .
simplifi and verifi we have an ident and we do have a solut .
and a particularli simpl and eleg on at that .
if in a two parti elect , on candid get n vote and the other get m vote and n is bigger than m .
the chanc of the win candid lead at everi step of the wai is n minu m over n plu m .
we could hardli have hope for a simpler or cleaner answer .
and against the odd , out of thi veri complic look structur emerg a rose of an answer .
a beauti , eleg answer .
what about the case when jane got <num> of the vote and bob got <num> of the vote ?
notic , as long as jane get <num> and bob get <num> , .
the actual number n and m don't matter .
it's onli their rel proport that matter and so whatev the size of the popul .
imagin let's sai a vote in the us state of florida would sai approxim <num> million voter .
if jane get <num> of the vote and bob get <num> of the vote , well it's a veri larg number .
jane and bob bob ar both get approxim <num> million vote apiec .
the chanc of jane lead everi step of the wai is in fact <num> minu <num> divid by <num> plu <num> .
or in other word , there is fulli a <num> chanc .
that jane lead bob everi step of the wai .
chanc in commonplac set tend to mean differ thing to differ peopl .
so , at some level , peopl might look at <num> and sai , well , that's a small number .
but if you think of it in the context of <num> million voter .
each of the candid get approxim half the vote , vote ar in random order , that on candid actual led the other candid everi step of the wai , that seem to feel unnatur , it doesn't feel right , all right .
or to put it into context , if in <num> state in a countri .
the <num> state of the unit state for exampl .
you had contenti elect where on parti led the other by <num> to <num> in each of the <num> state .
in mani other state of cours , the run count would go all , all direct , on parti ultim triumph .
but , on averag in on out of those <num> state , perhap the unhappi state of florida , you might have a candid lead over <num> million count vote where she get half of them approxim .
she lead at everi step of the wai , for mani peopl you might find thi is .
okai and thi is again illustr of the fact , that chanc ha got unexpect well of possibl .
place where intuit is not suffici to get at the underli ground to truth .
for our purpos here , thi exampl , the ballot problem of wa where to add .
illustr how addit and condit on a carefulli chosen ancillari event can unlock an appar intract and difficult problem .
subtl and nuanc , right .
the difficulti wa not in the util of the formula .
the formula is as simpl as can be .
it's just a chain of condit probabl .
the difficulti in thi problem is identifi the appropri underli answer of the event .
which , partit of space and peel out what the individu piec ar .
thi problem is not just for fun .
it's not just for illustr purpos but it turn out to have deep consequ .
right ?
a , an eventu descend of thi line of thought lead to question about where random walk move .
thei lead to question in what is now call martingal theori .
and the understand of simpl problem like thi lead then to profound new result in new direct of endeavor .
let us take stock .
begin with the definit of condit probabl , we can now fold in a , as a veri simpl applic of addit , a principl which allow us to partit a problem into two piec .
and so in an abstract set , we can find the probabl of ani desir effect by chain togeth two condit probabl .
now , at it abstract , it's just an equat , a simpl on albeit .
but , as we've alreadi seen , the applic can be subtl .
the devil , of cours , is in the detail .
it resid in how on find the right partit for a problem .
what wa at the heart of thi simpl observ ?
a kei principl .
the divis of the sampl space of possibl , into two disjoint piec , a partit of the sampl space into two compon , a , and a complement of a .
thi understand all todai show the wai to an abstract gener , which is us in it own right .
so again , we began by partit a sampl space into two piec , and then figur out how that partit and event of interest .
if , now , on move beyond a partit into two element , and think about a partit into , sai , a finit number , n , of event .
a1 , a2 , a3 and so forth .
what we now obtain is a finit partit of the sampl space into n set .
recal that a partit mean that a constitu set a1 , a2 and so forth ar pairwis disjoint .
thei ar mutual exclus .
and togeth , thei compris the entir space .
formal , mathemat , we'll sai , ai into section aj is empti .
for ani parenthesi i and j , and the union of the ai's must be the entir sampl space .
and the moment we come up with such a partit , we sai that a fortiori , we have a partit of the event of interest itself .
and we can decompos an event of interest h , the target event , into a group of disjoint piec .
that portion of h , which is in a1 , stitch togeth with that portion of h and a2 , and so forth .
formal , of cours , we have taken a union of a bunch of intersect .
the kei point here , of cours , is becaus the origin set a1 through an ar disjoint , so ar the piec h intersect a1 , h intersect a2 and so forth .
addit arriv to the rescu promptli .
and we can know decompos the probabl of h as a sum of individu probabl .
addit is the whole is equal to the sum of the part .
the moment where you have such a decomposit , we sai that on the right , we have a system of intersect probabl , and we can promptli chain them togeth us our definit of condit probabl to come up with a gener of the basic principl of addit .
it's abstract but we'll see exampl and applic in a moment .
befor you do that , on more quick extens .
the pictur suggest a partit of an underli sampl space into a finit number of set , sai , n , number .
but the argument is clear .
that it will hold untrammel even if the partit contain a countabl infinit number of set .
and if that's the case , then on the right , we'll have an infinit sum chain togeth of condit probabl .
thi gener principl of addit in thi particular context is follow chronograph semin work of <num> call , rather granduous , the theorem of total probabl .
inform put , we start with a partit of a sampl space into a collect of set , a collect of event , a1 , a2 , a3 .
these event have to be pairwis disjoint and the union ha to be the entir space .
we now look at a target event , h .
we decompos h into it piec in each of the aj's , stitch everyth togeth , and the result is a principl of addit in the context of condit probabl .
the theorem of total probabl .
the summat sign there , just sai that , add over all indic j , as aj rang over all the event in the partit .
thi collect could be finit , could be countabl infinit .
typic , we'll start index j at on , two , three , and proce from there .
occasion , it'll be conveni to start the count at zero .
and still , more occasion , it'll be conveni to let j run through all the integ .
applic of the theorem of total probabl reli upon our find a proper partit of a sampl space .
let me start with a histor exampl which is of some modern signific .
what ar the chanc that the sun will rise tomorrow ?
now , well thi is a perplex question .
there doesn't seem to be much room for chanc in thi particular game .
the problem , or thi particular question , wa pose by pierr simon , marqui de laplac , todai , we know , know him as laplac , the foremost mathemat physicist of the earli 19th centuri , in hi epoch volum , the analyt theori of probabl .
in thi book he posit the follow odd .
laplac wa will to wager about <num> million to <num> that the sun would rise tomorrow .
and hi argument went along the follow line .
he said well , it is manifest that the sun ha risen without a break for <num> , <num> year in a row , or perhap more precis by hi count , <num> , <num> , <num> dai in a row without a break .
and base upon thi number , <num> million dai of continu rise of the sun , he wa will to offer odd of about <num> million to on that the sun would inde rise tomorrow .
a student might well be forgiven for be a littl perplex .
what is an underli model of random here ?
it's not so clear at all , but there ar some clue in the wai laplac ha phrase hi argument .
appar , laplac place signific weight in the fact that there were a success of a long number of continu rise of the sun , and thi plai into the chanc of thi event occur again .
let us detour to set up a differ kind of problem where thi phenomenon is in evid .
so , as a non sequitur , a , a break from a direct line , let us go back to the ball and urn model .
consid as i have shown in the pictur , a system of <num> urn each contain <num> ball .
let us sai we number the urn zero , on , two , three up to ten .
the ball in each urn ar of two type , red and black .
the urn on the left consist of all the ball which ar black .
the urn on the right consist of ten red ball .
and gener , sai the kth urn in the middl contain k red ball and <num> minu k black ball .
here's a set .
now , let's quickli abstract thi , and instead of restrict ourselv to ten ball , think of a larg number , sai n , of ball and n plu <num> urn .
so we ar given n plu <num> urn label zero through n .
each urn contain n ball .
the kth urn contain k red ball and n minu k black ball .
the chanc experi proce as follow .
on of these urn is select at random .
have pick an urn , we set it asid and repeatedli sampl ball from it randomli and with replac .
our question .
suppos we're not told which urn wa select but we ar told , thi is side inform , that r success draw result in r red ball in a row .
what is a chanc that the r plu 1th draw from that select urn will result in a red ball ?
the tenuou connect to the laplacian problem ar clear .
there's a repeat occurr of an event .
and we now ask how doe thi condit a futur occurr ?
but in thi set a chanc experi is easi to construct and the underli sampl space is easi to identifi .
so without further ado what is a sampl space ?
well , all the element that ar uncertain in the experi can be categor as follow .
first , there's a select of an urn .
next , there's a repeat select of a ball with replac from that urn , each ball character by it color , red or black .
sinc we ar consid a select of an urn and r plu <num> select of ball , we could think of the sampl space as a string , a sequenc of letter .
a specif of an urn , sai x , take valu from <num> , <num> , through n , follow by a specif of ball color , y1 , y2 , y3 , through y sub r plu <num> , where each valu y take on of two color , red or black .
now we have a , an understand of what constitut a , an ideal outcom of thi chanc experi .
what ar the event of interest ?
well , let's begin .
natur , on event of interest is the event that r draw from the select urn result in r success red ball .
a second event of interest is that r plu <num> success draw from that select urn result in r plu <num> red ball .
let's introduc some notat , all right ?
let h sub k denot the event that the first k draw from the select add result in red ball .
formal thi is a collect of sequenc x , y1 , y2 though yr plu <num> , where y1 through yk ar red and other variabl ar free to move willi nilli as you will .
of cours , the particular valu of k of interest to us ar k is equal to r and k is equal to r plu <num> .
now thi by itself is a complex look problem .
there ar too mani move piec here .
we natur look about for a wai to partit it , break it up into simpl , homogen segment .
and a natur partit is immedi suggest by annot , by the first element in the sampl point , the select of the urn .
so let's introduc some ancillari notat .
let a0 , a1 , a2 through a sub n , repres , sequenti , the event that the zeroth urn wa select , the first urn wa select , and the nth urn wa select .
gener , let a sub j denot the event that the jth urn wa select .
j run from zero through n .
natur enough , we ar go to condit on these event a sub j as ancillari event .
observ that sinc some urn ha to be select , the event a0 , a1 , through an partit the sampl space .
all sampl point have to be in on or the other of these event .
and it's manifestli clear that these event ar disjoint , thei ar mutual exclus .
if on choos , sai the third urn , then on manifestli ha not select , sai , the seventh urn .
we ar now left with the task of specifi a probabl measur .
and in such set it is most natur to specifi the measur implicitli via condit probabl .
let us start with the ancillari event a sub j .
in the laplacian model , there is no reason to believ that ani on urn is more like to be select than ani other .
and therefor , we assign to each of these event , a0 , a1 through an , equal probabl , <num> over n plu <num> .
have select an urn , what can we sai about the event <num> sub k , that k success draw result in red ball .
now if the jth urn wa select , then we recal that the jth urn contain j red ball and n minu j black ball .
each draw of a red ball ha got j possibl .
k success draw , the number of possibl , in total , is n to the power k , and the number of wai of which these n to the k can result in red ball is j to the k .
rememb , the urn contain j red ball .
and therefor , if you're look at a string of k draw , we have j , j , j , k time and by the usual principl of enumer , there ar j to the power k wai of select k red ball from thi urn .
now , the probabl , therefor , that given that the jth urn ha been select , that k red ball in success have been drawn , is j to the power k divid by n to the power k .
there's a beauti and simpl prescript of an implicit probabl measur .
just as we did in the case of two dice , we can now go back and figur out the mass function attach to each particular ideal outcom .
but that'll take us a littl far afield , and it is not necessari for our purpos .
with thi in hand we ar quit equip to begin an assault on the question of what doe k red ball in a row sai about the chanc of a k plu <num> red ball in a row .
recal the implicit measur place equal mass on the event a0 , a1 , through an and give you condit probabl in a veri natur sens .
now , suppos we ask , what can i sai about a probabl .
that k red ball in a row were chosen , from which of were overselect .
the event h sub k is now stand in the role of the event h in the definit of condit probabl on your upper right .
we natur decompos thi event in term of the ancillari event a0 , a1 through an which tell which urn wa select , and now we've got a chang rule for condit probabl .
observ that in the sum it wa more natur to begin the sum at j equal to <num> and run it all the wai up to n .
the implicit specif of the probabl measur reduc the sum into a nice and simpl form .
now at thi step , the probabilist intuit of the problem is exhaust .
we've now got a sum .
the sum mai or mai not be reduc in term of simpler element , but now the probabl , or chanc element , ar exhaust .
but , of cours , we don't want to leav a sum in that form .
we'd like to see if we can simplifi it , get some inform from what the natur of the sum is .
in particular , we'd like to sai someth about what happen to such a sum if a number of possibl for urn , if a number of ball n is veri larg ?
now let's write the sum out explicitli .
right , so the sum now ar of the form an integ over n to the power k .
and thei're multipli by valu <num> over n plu <num> .
recal , n is a larg number .
so we've got these small increment , <num> over n plu <num> multipli a power of k .
thi begin to look familiar .
we've seen sum like thi on the pathwai in the basic calculu , on the pathwai to integr .
let's focu on again what ar the thing we're ad .
we're ad weight power of k .
well let's take a look at a power of k .
natur enough , we call it x to the power of k , x run from <num> to <num> , and we've got a smooth increas curv .
what doe each summand look like ?
all right .
if you look at , sai , the jth summand , it's got a height , j over n to the power k .
and so , that give you the height of the curv x to the power k at the point j over n .
it's multipli by <num> over n plu <num> .
if we subdivid the unit interv into n plu <num> piec , each of width n over <num> plu <num> , the the jth term correspond to a rectangl of height j over n to the power k and width <num> over n plu <num> .
and therefor the jth term is identifi as the area under the jth rectangl .
when you sum up all these term , we're sum area of a sequenc of rectangl .
as n becom larg , these rectangl get closer and closer and closer to the area under the curv .
we begin to recogn a riemann sum .
as an approxim to an ordinari , garden varieti riemann integr .
and thi integr is particularli simpl and beguil .
and so if we know make the natur step and sai , n is larg .
then the sum in question is inde an approxim to the integr from <num> to <num> of x to the power k .
but of cours , thi is a complet elementari integr .
and we evalu it , and we find that the answer is beguil in it simplic .
under thi probabl model , for repeat select of ball from a random n , the chanc that k red ball ar drawn in a row , is approxim <num> over k plu <num> .
and the approxim get tighter and tighter and tighter the larger n becom .
we're now equip to answer the follow question .
given that our red ball in a row have been drawn , what is the chanc that the next draw will result in a red ball ?
from a mathemat prospect , thi is equival to ask what a condit probabl of the occurr of the event hr plu <num> , given that the event , hr , ha occur .
now we promptli just write down the definit of condit probabl .
and , we get a ratio of probabl , and the kei here is to observ that the event , hr and hr plu <num> stand at a particular relat .
hr plu <num> mean that r plu <num> red ball have not preserv .
but if r plu <num> red ball were drawn , then manifestli it is true that r red ball must have been drawn prior to that .
and , therefor , the event hr plu <num> , will impli the occurr of the event , hr .
from a perspect , the event hr , plu <num> , is a subset of hr , and therefor , the intersect of the two , result in the smaller of the two set .
in other word , simpli hr plu <num> .
and therefor , the condit probabl in question devolv into a ratio of probabl .
hr plu <num> , the numer , hr in the denomin .
and now we simpli plug in our beauti reimann approxim .
and if we do thi , we discov that the condit probabl of draw a red ball , given that r red ball have been drawn , differ from <num> onli in the reciproc of r plu <num> .
on could hardli ask for a simpler , cleaner explan .
now , befor we go back to laplac , let's do a quick saniti check .
and to make sure we have the mechan under control , let's ask the follow question .
what can we sai about the probabl that given r red ball have been drawn in a row , the next s draw result in red ball .
in other word , what is the probabl of the event hr plu s condit upon the occurr of the event hr ?
take a minut and see if you can work out an approxim .
if we follow through exactli the same line of argument , as is sketch about , we find that the probabl is given by the ratio of r plu <num> , to s plu r plu <num> .
and the argument is exactli the same .
how doe thi fit in with the origin question in that laplac rais ?
to get a proper understand would requir a care , histor studi to get at what laplac intend by thi kind of analog , okai .
but on could imagin make a tenuou connect if we replac ball by let's sai univers , a larg number of potenti univers , on of which is chosen at random .
and then we model the sun rise everydai of the year as a random experi with replac , what all that mean in that given univers .
then we have in a veri , veri vagu and tenuou wai a connect to the zern problem .
and of cours , as i've said , to get a real understand of what laplac meant , we'd realli have to undertak a detail studi , and that would take us a littl far afield .
as a side note , that , remark these idea of multipl univers ar now get currenc in variou model of our quantum mechan univers .
but that take us further afield .
let's come back to laplac .
the kind of mathemat analysi we want taken is impecc .
the probabl model there , the probabl space is clear .
there's no ambigu .
and therefor , the conclus's also veri , veri clear .
the connect with the origin question of the sun rise is much more tenuou .
thi requir a measur of faith in some underli , styliz , sanit model of random .
which of cours is would be highli debat in the best of time .
even if on were will to bui into an argument involv a larg number of univers , the laplacian kind of argument captur in that quot from laplac would posit the occurr of the follow event .
that a sun ha risen for a larg number of dai , about <num> million dai , without a break .
of cours , we believ in someth like that for the same reason as we believ that the sun will rise tomorrow .
of cours , the underli foundat for our belief structur here , we draw from the mechan univers of isaac newton .
and simpl model of physic , which allow us to predict and test variou hypothesi , 'kai .
laplac , of cours , wa quit cogniz of thi .
and , so here's anoth quot , which tell us that thi kind of analysi should in context like thi , should be taken with a larg bit of salt .
laplac pose thi problem in the year <num> .
todai we call it laplac's law of success .
thi idea wa to have an entir modern cast to it , some oh , <num> <num> year later .
thi is our next applic .
the pictur on your screen is that of the great pyramid of keop , construct about <num> bc .
and ever sinc then , it ha continu to inspir , to beguil , to caus wonder in all it behold .
the great financi crash of <num> caus enorm turmoil in world financi market .
and in that turmoil , compani larg and small were swept awai in the rubbl .
a larg scale casualti wa the vener firm lehman brother , which , after <num> year of exist , crumbl in that collaps .
the evolutionari process of natur select articul by darwin ha seen the emerg of variou speci on the earth .
homo sapien , in particular , emerg out of africa approxim <num> , <num> year ago and continu to popul the planet .
space explor began in earnest in the space race in the 1960s .
the intern space station shown in your pictur wa launch about <num> and ha been continu inhabit sinc then .
militari coup have troubl the world's histori from time immemori .
the cartoon on your screen show napoleon bonapart trampl over egalit , freedom , when he take over franc in the earli part of the 19th centuri .
of cours , these kind of event repeat and recur again and again in our histori .
and thei're not at all uncommon in the 21st centuri , where a militari coup , or a junta , take control of a countri with variou reason , inevit , with a promis to restor normal function shortli .
but then the militari power continu unab for a period of time .
what do all these exampl in these imag have in common ?
if we abstract out a kei idea , it is that of a phenomenon which crop up into exist at some point in time , and exist for a certain period of time befor it vanish .
the great pyramid of keop , construct about <num> bc , and last for well , we don't know whe , how long .
the space station launch in <num> ha a lifetim of some time in the futur .
a firm , a startup , a compani , launch at some time in the past and ha an exist , a lifetim of some ec , durat .
in all these case , at the current moment , we observ that phenomenon .
what we have seen is that the phenomenon ha exist for a certain period of time , an elaps time , let's call that r .
and the phenomenon is go to continu to exist for a certain addit period of time till it lifetim is done .
thi is the , a futur time for the phenomenon .
a question , whimsic to be sure , that on might pose is the follow .
at the point of time where we observ thi phenomenon , sai the great pyramid of keop , the phenomenon ha been in exist for a certain amount of time .
so the pyramid of keop ha been in exist for about <num> , <num> year .
so the phenomenon ha continu unab .
it ha live for , let us sai , littl r dai .
given that phenomenon ha exist for r dai , what can we sai about the chanc that it will persist for an addit s dai ?
hm .
thi look wors than tenuou .
it's not at all clear what the underli sampl space for such an experi might be .
what is the distribut of the lifetim of the phenomenon ?
well , we don't know .
and the vari exampl i've given you show veri differ kind of phenomena .
we don't even have the begin of a model for lifetim distribut .
could we make ani progress ?
well , here is an idea .
thi wa articul by the princeton astrophysicist richard gott in <num> , and the idea wa to posit a principl for futur time given a certain elaps time .
and gott's idea is what we could todai call the copernican principl .
and it can be encapsul veri snappili , in a veri memor fashion by sai that the point of observ is not special .
now , what doe that mean , and where doe copernicu come into the pictur ?
let me take you back to about two millennia to about <num> ad , and the world that wa seen by claudiu ptolemi .
ptolemi wa a mathematician , an astrograph , an astronom , a sometim writer and poet .
and by detail and care observ , he figur out the particular orbit of each celesti bodi around the earth .
thi is now what we call the ptolema univers .
the orbit that each bodi take on , around the earth ar quit complex .
thei form cycl , epicycl , epicycl upon epicycl , a senior figur .
but if on is care , on can veri painstakingli construct individu orbit for everi celesti bodi as it circumnavig the earth .
now thi model had substanti endur power .
thi model of the univers persist for about <num> , <num> year , until nichola copernicu in about the earli part of the 16th centuri , around <num> , said the model is not accur .
copernicu by dint of observ posit that a proper model would be to place the sun at the center of the known univers .
and soon after copernicu postul thi revolutionari , reactionari idea , kepler , about <num> year later , by dint of care observ , figur out that everi celesti object in the ski ha beautifulli regular geometr orbit around the sun .
and about a hundr year later , isaac newton , through the discoveri of univers gravit .
discov that all of thi could be describ through a veri simpl mechan experi .
by on equat , forc is equal to mass time acceler , and thi give you all the ellipt orbit that we ar familiar with todai .
what doe thi have to do with our problem of the exist of a phenomenon ?
well , here's a kei principl .
the kei idea that copernicu articul , which overturn <num> , <num> year of ptolema dogma , wa that the earth wa not the center of the univers , but the sun wa .
revolutionari , reactionari , danger , but accur .
hi idea wa in a larg sens a huge blow to our collect ego .
we could paraphras what he said by sai , we do not have a special place in the univers .
we ar not special .
now , if you take thi principl and appli it to our set of a phenomenon .
the copernican principl sai the observ point is not special .
what that could sai is that the observ point is just as like to be in the first quartil of the exist of the phenomenon as in the last quartil of the exist of the phenomenon .
we should make hast to understand that thi is an assumpt .
a naiv , blind util of such an assumpt could lead to ridicul result .
but let us take thi assumpt , which on face valu is , doesn't seem unexception , at least in perhap , in some circumst , which ar not , understand , well specifi yet .
but if we take thi principl to heart , what doe it sai ?
it sai effect that a laplacian law of success is an oper .
look at a laplacian equat on the top right .
what doe it sai ?
we recal , the experi wa draw ball repeatedli from a randomli select urn .
given that r red ball have been drawn in success , the chanc that s subsequ ball drawn ar red is approxim , when the urn ar veri larg in number , about r plu <num> divid by s plu r plu <num> .
if we posit a model of copernican uncertainti to the observ point , then an approxim equival laplacian prior might posit that a condit probabl , whatev the underlin probabl space is , of the futur durat be at least s , given that r dai have elaps in the phenomenon's exist is about r over s plu r .
you should compar the copernican principl as we outlin it with the laplacian model for the laplac's law of success .
and we realiz thi is essenti articul the same principl of laplacian uncertainti .
of cours , you know , you could caveat thi kind of , of a touchi feeli , loosei goosei applic of probabl when it's not even clear what the underlin sampl space for the experi is .
but let us see where thi kind of model format or assumpt lead us .
variou divert calcul can be , can be made onc we make such an assumpt .
and let me show you a coupl .
so to begin , what can we sai about the probabl that the futur time for thi phenomenon , the futur exist , li between r over <num> and <num> time r given that the elaps time is r dai .
now , i can immedi write an equat down , but thi would probabl requir a littl bit of thought .
let's begin with the first term on the right .
the probabl that the futur time exce r over <num> given that the elaps time is littl r dai .
now , if the futur time exce r over <num> .
thi can happen in on of two wai .
certainli , thi event will occur if the futur time exce 39r dai .
thi is the event on the right of the equat .
it can also happen if the futur time li between r over <num> and <num>r .
thi is the event to the left of the equat .
and therefor all you've written down is the principl of addit .
we've broken down the event that the futur time exce r over <num> into two disjoint piec .
the futur time is between r over <num> and 39r , and the futur time exce 39r .
and the moment you write someth like thi down , we can immedi turn through our copernican assumpt .
and plug in , identifi with futur durat littl s , the valu r over <num> and 39r , respect .
and now an elementari calcul show that we get a number , <num> . <num> .
in word , in thi model there's a <num> chanc that the futur exist of the phenomenon li between r over <num> and <num> time r , given that a phenomenon ha exist for littl r dai .
let's try on more exampl .
what is the condit probabl that the futur exist of the phenomenon is at least r over <num> and no more than <num>r given that the phenomenon ha exit , exist for littl r dai ?
again , addit allow us to write down , in on fell swoop , a decomposit .
and now , we plug in our copernican assumpt , churn through the algebra , and we find that the chanc that the futur exist of the phenomenon li between r over <num> and 3r given that the phenomenon ha exist for r dai is <num> .
curious and curious .
of cours , you might ask how did i pick these strang number , r over <num> and <num>r .
r over <num> , and <num>r .
of cours , a short answer is , i chose those number becaus i knew what i wa do and i want to get nice answer at the right , <num> , <num> .
you could replac the bookend of these inequ by other valu .
try that and see what you get .
our conclus from thi is as follow .
there is a <num> chanc that a phenomenon will not persist for more than <num> time the elaps durat of the phenomenon .
there's a <num> chanc the phenomenon will be extinguish within three time the elaps durat of the phenomenon .
all right .
what doe thi sai ?
well , let's go back to the pictur we had at the variou eclect phenomena i show you and come up with some amus consequ .
goff point out that assum a <num> , <num> year exist for the great pyramid of cheop , the pyramid will continu to fascin and beguil , creat wonder and intrigu for mayb anoth <num> , <num> year , befor it disappear into the sand of the desert .
thi , with a <num> confid .
hm , the exist of homo sapien is an epiphenomenon .
assum a <num> , <num> year current histori for the speci , the copernican principl in thi formul sai , if you multipli it by about <num> or <num> , that it predic the continu exist of the speci , our speci , for an initi about <num> million year .
<num> million year , but who's count ?
with a <num> confid , and then after about <num> million year , the speci quietli disappear like a dildo , into the well of extinguish speci .
now that's veri sad .
but god , whimsic , provid an out .
thi is , well , but what if a speci manag to leav the earth's gravit whirl and colon other planet ?
then you might be abl to evad thi <num> million year moratorium in exist .
but wait .
to leav the planet surfac would requir space explor .
but space explor is a modern phenomenon .
it ha been in exist for about <num> year or so .
so given that space explor as a phenomenon , ha exist for <num> year , there is a <num> chanc that we will not explor space after <num> year from now .
and so , here's a tongu and cheek exhort for colon space , for invest in the space program .
our futur exist , in thi tongu and cheek model , depend upon it .
a word of caution would be wise here .
the model assumpt ar larg and sweep .
we cannot cavalierli appli it willi nilli all over the place .
for exampl , it would be ridicul to appli the copernican principl to a non algerian .
the princip sai that a longer a phenomenon ha been in exist , the longer is predict futur exist .
thirti nine time ar with a <num> confid .
three time ar with a <num> confid .
but , a non algerian doe not have much longer to live , given the biolog constraint on the speci as we have them todai .
the copernican principl would fail badli in such a context .
right .
now , what is manifest here is that , in such a set , the observ point is manifestli special .
if you choos the observ point toward the end of a person's lifetim , then there is not much surviv life to come .
anoth exampl might be for instanc , a second term presid of the unit state .
if a presid is in hi seventh year , then that would , by the copernican principl , predic a fairli long futur tenur , much longer than sai , a presid in hi first year .
but thi would , again , be a bad misread and applic of the principl .
the rule of the game in the unit state put a two term limit , current , on presid , so a presid cannot serv for more than eight year .
so if you look at a presid in hi seventh year , there is veri littl time left in hi or her presid .
but there ar other set where the principl might well seem to be approxim applic .
could you think of someth ?
in a modern context , how about a start up ?
common experi tell us that start up ar extinguish in larg number veri earli .
veri few start up surviv more than a few year .
but if a start up surviv it teeth pain , get richer capit fund , start to make a profit , build on the profit and start to creat a larger enterpris , creat an ipo so it becom public and becom larg .
then suddenli , you have someth with stai power .
so then , you have someth like , let's sai , an intern busi machin , an ibm , mayb an amazon . com .
someth which surviv from a set where compani were fall in drove in the earli stage .
a few surviv .
but the moment thei surviv , thei becom big .
thei tend to persist for a long time .
here's a set where on could think of appli the copernican principl , and sure there is ampl data out there that we can test the principl on .
for our purpos , the idea wa , on , it wa interest .
it's fun , it's amus .
it is a simpl applic of the laplacian model of success , to posit a probabl model where it is not clear where the sampl space wa .
but nonetheless , us and intrigu predict aris out of the set .
for our purpos , we think of thi as an applic of the theorem of total probabl .
so , let us start todai with the idea of famili .
now , we understand the famili can have variou size , and of cours , the chanc driven element in these idea is the question of the gender of the children .
and let's start with a veri sanit and simpl problem .
sai a famili ha two children .
it is known that on of the two children is a boi .
what ar the chanc that the other child is a boi ?
paus and think about thi for a moment , and see whether you come up with an instinct answer .
wa it perhap on half ?
now , if you came up with such an answer , thi is entir reason .
it is base upon a vagu presumpt that the gender of children ar independ , whatev that mean , and that the two sex ar equal like .
and therefor , if you're told that on child is a boi , then the gender of that child doe not , in our intuit understand , affect the gender of the other child , and sinc then , both sex ar equal like of occurr , then the chanc of that child be a boi is on in two .
thi sound realli reason , but befor we accept thi as an accur answer , we should paus and think about thi in term of the abstract formul that we built up .
what is the probabl space under consider ?
what is the sampl space of outcom ?
what ar the event of interest ?
and , what doe the probabl measur ?
befor we come to a right understand of what thi particular question is ask .
so , let us start with a sampl space .
what is a space of ideal outcom of thi experi ?
well , it is natur to write down each sampl point , or ideal outcom , of the experi by list the gender of the two children by ag , older child first , younger child next .
to us b for boi , g for girl , and us a gothic font to distinguish it from ordinari letter , we find the sampl space ha got four outcom in it , four sampl point .
the sampl point ar bb older boi , and younger boi , bg older boi , younger girl , gb and gg .
what now , ar the event of interest in thi particular structur ?
recal that event ar subset of the sampl space .
now , we ar interest in the other child be a boi , and therefor the nativ event of interest to us is the event that both children ar boi .
let us call thi event a .
now , there's onli on sampl point which will trigger a , and that sampl point is when both children ar boi .
in other word , it's b , b .
and therefor a , the event of interest , is compris of a singl atom event , a singleton , a set consist of on sampl point .
lurk in the background , and thi is the inform we're given about the problem , is anoth event , the event that there is a boi .
or more accur , there is at least on boi .
now , if you take a look at thi in a hard , cold light , what thi sai is , thi exclud the possibl that both children ar girl .
and if we remov that particular sampl point from the sampl space , then the remain three sampl point ar all trigger for thi event .
let's us call it b .
that at least on child is a boi , and therefor , b is compris of the sampl point bb , bg , and gb .
excel .
we've got two element of the probabl space under control , the sampl space and the event of interest .
we now have to come to a probabl measur , and natur enough , we have a discret set , in fact , a finit set .
it's suffic to provid an atom probabl , a probabl for each atom , each singleton set .
and in thi veri natur set , in thi veri sanit set , it is natur to assum that all atom have got equal probabl .
to assign equal probabl mass to each of the atom set , consist of bb alon , bg alon , gb alon , and gg alon .
the moment we have these atom probabl , we can construct the probabl for ani set whatsoev , by simpli ad up the probabl of the constitu atom .
becaus thi is combinatori set , the result probabl ar go to depend onli upon the number of element in your set , and not on what the precis element ar .
and therefor , the probabl of the event a , that both children ar boi , is simpli <num> in <num> , and the probabl of the event b , that there is at least on boi in the famili is <num> in <num> .
a pictur can sometim help to make these abstract concept a littl more vivid .
so , suppos we write down the four element in the sampl space in thi tiliz pictur that i've shown you , color code to help us notic what the variou element ar .
i'm us red for the event a and green subsum within the red in the case of bb for the event b , that there's at least on boi .
thi now is a sampl space .
in thi sampl space , the chanc of a occur becaus it is a combinatori set , is natur <num> in <num> .
thi is the unvarnish probabl of a without ani side inform about the process at hand .
but wait , we ar not told someth about the outcom of the experi .
we're told someth about the famili that is be observ .
we ar told that thi particular famili ha at least on boi .
thi mean that in the sampl space that we start with , the sampl point consist of two girl is eschew , is remov .
it is as if the sampl space wa simplifi by the expuls , by expung certain element of the space .
thi is what the inform on the side is provid us .
it ha reduc the space of possibl .
we now have three possibl .
it's as if our sampl space ha becom thi new event , b .
now , given that b ha occur , we know now that onli on of three possibl outcom can have occur .
and now we ask , what is the chanc that a occur ?
what is the chanc the other child is a boi ?
what is the chanc that both children ar boi , given that there is at least on boi ?
thi natur resid at the intersect of these two event .
the chanc there ar two boi and that there is at least on boi , is precis the event that there ar two boi .
the event a , in thi case , happen to be contain in , it's a subset of the event b .
natur enough , the space of possibl is reduc .
instead of four , we now have three .
all of them happen to have equal chanc , and therefor , the probabl of observ that the other child is a boi , given that there is at least on boi , is a ratio of these two .
it is a proport part of a that li in b , colloqui speak .
and therefor the chanc we will ascrib , natur , is <num> in <num> , not <num> in <num> as we might naiv have presum .
here , now , is an exampl in a veri simpl set of how side inform can modul underli chanc .
a chanc , a nativ chanc , or <num> in <num> , ha now becom a chanc of <num> in <num> .
let's take a look at a slightli more complex exampl to drive home thi point , and let us return to enter the old standbi , dice .
the idea of total probabl allow us to partit problem into manag size .
the particular problem of interest , of cours , depend upon the natur of the problem .
a consequ of total probabl is our abil to revers the direct of condit .
some context first .
so let's start with some abstract probabl space , some sampl space omega .
and imagin that we have a partit of omega into a finit of countabl infinit number of event a sub j .
we will think of the probabl of these event a sub j , as the a priori probabl of a chanc experi .
these ar the probabl that on start with befor the experi is actual perform , befor we see anyth .
probabl befor the fact .
we imagin , as we've seen repeatedli in our exampl , that the probabl measur is implicitli specifi via certain condit probabl .
a condit probabl of some target event h given some prior outsid inform , a sub j .
we will think of these , in a natur sens , as we will see shortli , as forward or transit condit probabl .
from a pure mathemat point of view , we think of thi as start with an a sub j , and then proceed to an h .
the question now is what happen , what can we sai about the condit probabl in revers ?
what is the probabl of an a sub k given an h ?
now , now the set is someth like thi .
it might be fruit to imagin that the a sub js repres a partit , an input to some probabilist system .
for exampl , imagin mobil telephoni .
imagin digit commun .
where the a sub js could repres symbol that ar transmit , on after the other .
for exampl , the a sub js could repres the letter of the english alphabet , a , b , c , d , up through z .
the a priori probabl reflect the intrins or natur frequenc of these letter in that alphabet .
for exampl , the letter e in the english alphabet occur about <num> of the time , an excess larg proport of the time , in ordinari convers , in written languag .
the letter zed , on the other hand , appear veri infrequ , about <num> . <num> of the time .
so these repres the a priori probabl .
we'll assum thei're known .
we can infer them from the problem .
imagin again that thei're transmit a letter .
we receiv some letter but the transmiss medium is noisi .
it is imperfect .
so we receiv a letter , let's sai h .
i don't necessarili mean the english letter h , but an imag h repres some symbol that is obtain .
and the transit from a transmit symbol h a to a receiv symbol h ha a certain probabl .
a condit probabl of h given h a .
we will veri natur in term of thi diagram think of thi as a forward condit probabl , or if you're think of it dynam , a transit probabl .
these we assum ar known to us , ar given to us .
for exampl , from an understand of the physic of the problem or the biologi of the problem .
or perhap pure on mathemat model consider .
the question at hand is thi .
again , keep in mind , let's sai a commun exampl .
a symbol ha been transmit .
a symbol ha been receiv .
onc the experi is done , onc the transmiss ha been done , the receiv ha a symbol at hand .
and her burn question is , what symbol actual wa transmit ?
in other word , she want to revers the direct of the problem .
she sai , given that a symbol h is in hand , what ar the chanc that a particular symbol , ak , wa transmit ?
if you can comput these revers probabl , these ar natur call the a posteriori probabl , probabl after the fact .
then in principl we could figur out what is the most like symbol which wa origin transmit given that a particular symbol wa receiv .
okai .
now how doe on go about do someth like thi ?
well natur , we're given the a priori probabl , we ar given the transit probabl .
our natur instinct is to partit the sampl space accord to the event a sub j in our exampl , the symbol that were transmit .
and then total probabl allow us to write down the probabl of obt , obtain ani of the receiv symbol simpli by addit .
so far , so good .
thi is now readili comput , given the inform we haven't had .
our question is , how do we revers the quest .
well by the definit of condit probabl , the probabl of an event ak given h is obtain as a ratio .
the joint probabl of these two event divid by the probabl of h , but we can decompos the probabl of h in term of the a priori probabl , in term of the forward condit probabl .
and then we now get an express which look like a chain formul , and you'll notic that on the right the onli term that appear ar the a priori probabl and , the forward condit probabl that ar known to us .
we now have an explicit mechan for revers the direct of condit .
thi formul is call bay's rule for event .
now , at a high level , a student would be well advis to not memor a formula , but understand how it wa stitch togeth .
at work is simpli the principl of addit , the principl of total probabl .
an experi will then allow her to stitch revers probabl togeth .
let us look at anoth exampl to bring thi into context .
we consid the follow set .
thi ha got a classic advantag .
it is call polya's urn scheme .
at heart , thi is a , an urn and ball problem .
imagin that on ha a town , with r plu s resid .
r of the resid ar royalist .
thei support the king .
s of the resid ar seditionist .
thei want to implement insurrect , and replac the king .
okai .
not veri fanci , but color .
imagin that the town's popul grow steadili , if errat .
at variou epoch in time , group of settler arriv , a settler at a time .
imagin that you have buse pull up .
fill to capac with a peopl in them .
and buse come at variou time .
and each time a bu come in , you add a peopl to the popul of a town .
now , the first individu that thi bu load , these arriv meet , is either a royalist , or a seditionist ?
if thei meet a royalist first , then the entir group decid to don royalist color , and thei becom royalist .
if thei meet a seditionist first , then the entir group decid to join the rebellion and thei becom seditionist .
now , here's a simpl , veri simpl model , and of cours , is a veri crude model of growth into two categori .
now , if you take the fanci trap of thi problem apart it's hard to realiz that what we ar realli postul here is a veri crude model .
in epidemiolog , a crude model of the growth or spread of contagion .
of cours , we understand that in todai's world , variou epidem caus great constern in variou part of the world .
some of them lethal and deadli .
and so , it is of import for , in public polici to understand or to get some understand of how infect spread .
here now , is a veri simpl model .
the idea here is that you can imagin a popul of infect peopl , and peopl who ar well and perhap better .
peopl who have , let's sai oh , patch which resist infect .
arriv come in , and if thei meet a person who is sick , then thei fall sick .
if thei meet a person who is inocul and ha patch of resist , then thei develop resist to the diseas .
you understand ?
it's a veri simpl and crude model of how diseas might spread .
and how it ha sequest , how rapidli doe the diseas spread .
now , if we abstract how the color languag and the verbiag around thi , at heart , we have a ball and urn problem .
imagin that the individu repres ball .
initi , we have r plu s ball in an urn .
r ball ar red , s ball ar black .
each arriv correspond to draw a ball at random , look at it color , put it back in the urn .
in other word , it's sampl with replac .
and then , if the ball drawn is red , add a red ball to the urn .
if the ball drawn is black , add a black ball to the urn .
you understand , that thi urn scheme is formal indistinguish from thi fanci stori of royalist and seditionist , of ill spread .
okai .
so let's just focu on the essenc here , on hi ball and urn problem .
now , our question is thi , if we know that the second and third group becom royalist .
if we know that the second and third inhabit met by arriv ar red .
what ar the chanc that the first arriv , the first group met ar royalist ?
in the ball and urn model , given that the second and third ball drawn ar red , what is the chanc that the first ball drawn wa red ?
now , befor we launch into thi , it is alwai wise when deal with problem to think about the set .
doodl , sketch , draw .
try to get a right understand of the circumst around the problem .
imagin that we have as a root of a tree a popul of two flavor , r and s .
r red , s black .
thi tree now grow with arriv and each growth , each branch in the tree , add a to the popul .
a branch to the left sai that a red ball wa drawn , and a red ball were ad .
so in your first step , you move left , a red branch .
and a popul move with a mix of r and s , to a mix of r plu a and s .
a first black ball drawn , a seditionist met , mean the popul move from r s to r and s plu a .
there ar now s plu a black ball in the bin .
and now you move in red and black step , left and right , as i've shown you in the tree .
the vertic of thi tree repres the popul mix , depend upon the particular sequenc of ball' color that were drawn .
okai .
now , thi is , at minimum , it is evoc .
it bring a pictur to mind .
it allow us to see pathwai to analysi , our next step indubit is to try to put togeth probabl .
a priori probabl , a posteriori probabl , identifi event .
so let's take a look , all right .
idea here is , our basic question wa , if we observ two red ball in the second and third draw , what is the chanc the first ball drawn wa a red .
in other word , we're move along the left branch of the tree .
a red ball is drawn , a second red ball is drawn , a third red ball is drawn .
thi tell us that we need to somehow figur out how we're move along the edg of thi tree .
now , now let's build thi forth .
so here is our popul growth tree .
on the vertic i'm go to put down the popul distribut that ar each step depend upon the histori of transit .
on the edg i'm go to put weight .
and these weight ar go to repres condit probabl and in a veri natur sens in thi problem , forward condit probabl or transit probabl .
we ar now readi to set up the probabl space .
what is the sampl space for thi problem ?
what is uncertain in thi experi ?
a littl introspect will tell us , that what is uncertain is realli the color of the ball drawn at the first , second , third , fourth , and so on step .
each time i can tell you which color ball wa drawn .
then i'll know exactli which pathwai i'm take along thi tree .
and therefor , the sampl point can be thought of as sequenc of red and black .
and all possibl such sequenc constitut the sampl space .
what ar the event of interest ?
now , natur enough , we identifi the event of interest with the color of a ball drawn at a given step .
let us sai the kth step , r sub k denot the event that the kth ball drawn wa red .
so r1 repres the event that the first ball drawn wa red .
r sub <num> wa the event that the second ball drawn is red , and these all constitut in the second tier of the tree , the two red step move to your left .
and those two vertic , r plu 2a , and , s , and , r plu a and s , both repres a second red ball drawn .
r3 , repres a third red ball drawn , and it is the four leftward transit , or the third stage of the tree .
these ar natur event of interest , of cours , thei're complement .
what ar the complement of rk , well let's call it bk .
it repres the fact that the kth ball drawn wa black .
we observ that these event rk creat a natur partit of the space .
on the first step , i'll have to either get a red ball or a black ball .
i can't get built , and so thei natur partit the space .
excel , now we've got the event at hand .
we now want an implicit probabl measur .
and let's build thi on step at a time .
first , start at the root and move to a red modul .
the popul ha now becom r plu a red ball s ball .
the probabl of draw a red ball initi , natur , is proport to the number of red ball in the bin , and therefor , is r over r plu s .
now given that you've got a red ball initi , in the first red ball , what is the chanc that we draw a second red ball ?
in other word we move along the left edg of the tree again .
we're not talk about a condit probabl .
we're start with the premis that we obtain a red ball initi .
and therefor , with the popul of r plu a red ball and s black ball , the chanc of draw a red ball is r plu a over the total popul , r plu s plu a .
and work in thi fashion , we can move onto the next step .
the probabl of draw a third red ball , given that the first two drawn ball were red , is now again , written on the edg , it's r plu 2a , divid by r plu s plu 2a .
now we can readili see how we can fill out other transit probabl along these line .
paus for a minut and evalu the three condit probabl i've ask you to on the screen .
well , have you tri to make your wai through thi ?
well , let's walk our wai , through these probabl .
first , start of the rout , you draw a black ball first , you meet a seditionist first .
the chanc of that , well , there ar s black ball out of a total popul of r plu s , and the probabl therefor is written on that edg is s over r plu s .
now , given that you got a black ball , rim anoth popul make hi r and s plu a , what ar the chanc that you now obtain a red ball ?
well , thi is the condit of probabl , of r2 given b1 , and again just by look at the popul mix you have r and s plu a , the chanc of get a read is r over r plu s plu a , and again you see that on the edg .
given that you have a black ball initi follow by a red ball at the second draw , what is the chanc of a red ball on the next draw ?
hm .
well , the popul mix now , given that you have drawn alreadi a black ball and a red ball , is r plu a and s plu a .
the chanc of draw a red ball now is now r plu a divid by r plu s plu 2a .
and now you see how easi thi is .
you can systemat popul all the edg , here , with forward transit condit probabl as i've shown here .
you should paus for a bit and see if we agre with the number i've thrown up there for you .
thi is the set .
at thi point , we have now come to a right understand of the premis of the problem , right ?
notic we put in a fair amount of work here , right ?
just to understand what the problem is sai .
and we should alwai do thi befor we launch directli into an attack on the problem .
i know that long tradit and custom through your earli school year ha brought in thi , thi instinct to just dive into a problem .
but ani worthwhil problem need introspect , need thought , need time to understand what is go on .
and thi will well repai you .
at thi point , we've understood how to write down the a priori probabl .
we learn to write down the forward condit probabl , but the question at hand is can i revers the direct of condit .
but for now we're requir to do thi .
let's move directli onto thi .
let's start with a simpl question .
given that the second ball drawn is red , so you're look at the second level of the tree , and you're look at the red transit to your left , given that on of those happen .
what ar the chanc that a first transit fall to the left ?
okai .
let's build it up on step at a time .
our first question , what ar the chanc that the first two ball drawn ar red ?
well , from a formal mathemat point of view , the event at hand ar r1 and r2 and we want the conjunct of the intersect of them .
we write down an express like thi and we can just read thi out from the tabl .
but what have we us here ?
we us the chain principl from the definit of condit probabl , which express the desir probabl of r1 intersect r2 , in term of the a priori probabl on the transit of a forward condit probabl .
what can we sai about the probabl that the second ball is red , hm ?
formal , we want the probabl of the event r2 , and we can write down an express as you see emerg on the right of your screen .
write it down , paus , absorb it .
what is the guid principl for an ident like thi ?
do you recogn the us of total probabl .
we broke up the sampl space , into two piec .
r1 , and the complement of r1 , or b1 , thi wa a natur partit , which is given to us by the structur of the problem .
given the partit , we now have a formal express .
but , in thi express we can read out all the relev probabl by look at the vertic , the a priori probabl , and the transit , and there you go .
it's as easi as that , we've now got the sum of two fraction and now all that remain is to massag it us ordinari algebra , collect the denomin .
pool the numer term , factor them , catalogu common factor , and you've got a beauti , simpl , eleg express .
the probabl the second ball is red , is r over r plu s .
now , we've put in some work to get here , and we're tempt to sai , oh we're tire , we want to take a break , but .
we should alwai look back when we get an answer .
doe it illumin the problem ?
can i verifi it by direct method ?
is it intuit ?
now thi express r over r plu s look familiar .
have i seen thi befor ?
oh ye inde we have .
it is exactli the probabl of draw a red ball on the first draw .
hm , so the chanc of draw a red ball on the first or the second draw is the same .
if it's surpris , you should paus and think about thi .
perhap then you might conjectur the chanc of draw a red ball at the third trial is also the same .
try it .
see if you can verifi thi .
see if you can then come back and sai , i get it .
thi is why it should work .
thi is what i mean by an answer elimin a problem .
show you unexpect cranni and nook that you might not have anticip at first blush , when you first saw it .
let's move on .
the question at hand is a condit probabl .
what is the chanc the first ball drawn is red , given that the second ball drawn is red ?
well , let's write it down mathemat .
from the point of view of a definit , we can write down the condit probabl as a ratio .
but the whole point of the exercis is the object in the denomin can be expand out us total probabl .
in other word , we've just us bay's rule .
and now we've got a simpl ratio fraction , cancel our term , and we've got again , a simpl express .
r plu a divid by r plu s plu a .
again you should ask , hm , doe thi sai anyth about the problem ?
and stare at thi fraction , it becom clear as an easi exercis in clear denomin .
i'll show you that our answer is larger than the fraction of r over r plu s , which is exactli the probabl of draw a red ball on the first draw .
and so our express tell us that the condit probabl of draw a red ball on the first draw given that a red ball wa drawn on the second draw is larger than the probabl of draw a red ball in the first case .
hm , i wonder if thi is reason .
do you see ani connect to anyth that we've alreadi seen ?
somehow the condit probabl ha increas .
if on introspect you said , that look a littl bit like laplac's law of success .
repeat occurr of someth predispos an increas chanc of someth have happen .
and now i understand the connect .
i sai , oh ye , of cours , if you tell me that a red ball wa drawn on the second draw , it is intuit that there's a heighten chanc of have a larger popul of red ball after the first draw .
okai , now thi is veri intuit .
but of cours , our actual express add precis to these verbal bone .
it add flesh to thi .
it tell us precis , quantifi exactli how much the odd have improv .
now let's move on to the origin question we start with and thi of cours is go to requir a littl more elabor calcul .
but now we've got the structur of the calcul under our belt .
we understand exactli what's go on .
so here's our new problem .
given that the second and third ball drawn ar red , what is the chanc the first ball drawn is red ?
now come again , you should keep the tree in front of you , becaus it is go to allow you to write down just visual the kind of express you need .
let's first express the probabl at hand mathemat .
we ar interest in the condit probabl of the event r1 given the joint occurr of r2 and r3 .
the definit of condit probabl allow it , us to write it down as a ratio .
and now we sai that if we ar all prime for total probabl and bay's rule .
let's work through the step .
first the numer .
what is the joint probabl of draw three red ball in a row ?
immedi , the structur of the transit suggest that we appli a chain rule .
the probabl of r3 given r1 and r2 time the probabl of r2 given r1 time the probabl of r1 .
notic thi decomposit is in the forward direct becaus that is what is known to me .
that is what is given to us .
and of cours , onc we have thi , we just read thing off from the edg of the tree and write down an express .
and now , all that remain is to simplifi it , pool term , and you ar done .
what about the denomin for the condit probabl we start with ?
well , thing ar set up for total probabl .
the natur partit is base upon what happen in the first step .
rememb lao tzu and the chines proverb , a long journei start with a singl step .
well what happen with the first step ?
you either had a red ball or a black ball .
that natur partit the space and so total probabl allow us to write down the probabl of interest that the second and third ball drawn ar red , in term of what the first draw wa .
and now we simpli read out the probabl again .
and there we go .
right .
so we first start with a chain rule for each of the term on the right .
again , by condit on what the first draw wa .
now simpli read out , the variou probabl in the edg of your tree and write down what look like complic fraction .
but of cours , now we can simplifi thi veri , veri quickli .
pool the denomin , collect term in numer , cancel common term in numer and denomin , and ultim obtain a fairli simpli express .
we ar now all equip to go back to our start question .
the condit probabl , the first ball drawn is red given that the next two ball drawn ar red is now given by a ratio of fraction .
simpli cancel term .
pool it and obtain a veri simpl and eleg express .
there is divin that shape our end when you get answer so beauti , so simpl , so eleg .
the condit probabl of interest to us is r plu 2a divid by r plu s plu 2a .
we should paus now and take a look at what we alreadi know .
we observ that thi fraction is strictli larger than r plu a over r plu s plu a , which in turn is strictli larger than r over r plu s , and thi is done by simpli clear the denomin and compar term .
and so we've obtain again a reinforc of thi laplacian idea .
the condit probabl of a red ball in the first draw , given the next two ball drawn ar red , is larger than the condit probabl of a red ball , given that the next ball drawn is red , which is larger than the probabl of draw a red ball in the first case .
the more red ball that ar drawn later on , give you more and more reason to believ that you have a larger red popul to start with .
thi wa now the moral of the stori .
of cours , thi exampl is rich .
and it can see all kind of connect to it as a first step in a veri simpl model of , for exampl , the spread of contagion .
our purpos here were to illustr how in a , an exampl of a fair amount of structur , with a fair amount of rich there is ampl scope for the applic of total probabl of addit .
and revers the direct of condit , bay's rule .
befor we move on to conclud thi lectur and the segment , we should paus and extract a littl more inform about the set at larg .
can we extend it profit in other direct ?
now if you paus and think about the problem , a repres a number of arriv ineluct , a ha to be some kind of posit integ , perhap on , two , three , ten , someth like that .
but , if the student will go back and take a look at the analysi , she will find that , noth realli preclud a be a neg number .
so here is a question .
what if the quantiti a is a neg integ in polya's urn scheme ?
suppos for definit , a is minu <num> .
hm , what doe thi equival to ?
well in the urn scheme , thi sai that you start initi with r red ball and s black ball , you reach in , draw a ball , and look at it .
okai ?
the origin model said , well , you put it back in and put in a more ball of that color .
but of a's minu on , what you've effect done is , you reduc the red popul , if a red ball wa drawn initi , by on unit .
if a black ball wa drawn initi , you would reduc the black popul , by on unit .
in other word , thi situat with a be minu on , is equival to sampl without replac .
more gener , if a is a neg number , which is let's sai the neg of the greatest common divisor between the integ r and s .
then at each step you keep take out a ball of a given color and then sooner or later , the urn will be empti .
okai .
now the student should go back and ask , ar ani of the calcul that we have done compromis ?
do the calcul gener work ?
how far doe the tree extend ?
is it now an infinit tree or is it a finit tree ?
do the condit probabl inequ that we deriv , do these still hold .
what other applic domain could thi kind of extens fit into ?
well these ar all profit direct for inquiri , and i'll let you think about them .
so , to summar tableau <num> , part <num> , addit and the theorem of total probabl .
in the simplest set , addit in condit probabl manifest itself as a chain .
and it can break up a target event h base upon a partit of base insid inform , either in event a or it complement .
thi turn out to be an extraordinarili profit wai of think about break up a problem .
total probabl is an extens of , of thi addit idea .
to partit involv more than two element .
to a partit involv a finit number , or possibl even a countabl infinit number of event .
and in which case , we now have a chain formul for the probabl of a target of a date in term of condit probabl given variou input event if you like , aj .
a corollari to thi theme wa our abil now , onc we have thi formul of total probabl , of revers the direct of condit , figur out a posteriori probabl .
probabl after the fact via bay's rule .
as i mention earlier , a begin student should probabl not try to memor bays's rule in itself .
but understand how it aris by a systemat applic of the idea of total probabl , of addit .
thi conclud our discuss of condit probabl for the time be .
our next lectur , tableau <num> , will deal with , perhap , the fundament aspect of the theori of chanc , which reskew it from be nearli a fragrant by water of a gentl abstract theori of measur .
and the concept , the idea i'm refer to is the understand of the idea of statist independ .
now let's formul a simpl problem in the throw of two dice .
two dice ar thrown .
now we're told that the sum of the face valu of the two dice is eight .
what now is the chanc that at least on of the two dice show an ac ?
now thi perhap is not quit so intuit .
and mayb it is not so easi now to aris or jump at quickli at the wrong answer .
but if you like , paus for a moment and think about it , and see if you have an instinct feel , an intuit feel for what the answer might be .
start the lectur again when you're readi .
now , albeit in the immedi intuit for the problem .
we should start again by construct a probabl space for it , and we should begin with a sampl space .
now we have seen thi sampl space befor in tablo three , part three .
when we talk about the dice game of crap .
now in thi set , the sampl space is natur obtain by identifi the result for each die in turn .
sai , die on and die two .
the sampl space then becom a system of order pair of integ , where the element run from on through six , the possibl face for the die .
the sampl space ha got <num> possibl outcom .
six possibl for the first die , six possibl for the second die .
in thi space , what ar the subset that give rise to the event of interest ?
again let's color code these subset .
let a denot the event of interest , which is , that at least on of the two di show an ac .
now we think about thi for a moment , and we can identifi precis those pair for which on of the two element ar n , j , show six .
and we can enumer them veri systemat .
for exampl the first die show a six .
and then the second die can show ani of the number from on through six .
now or , the second die so , show a six , and now the first die can show ani of the number from on through five .
and there ar now <num> possibl in total , and these compris the event a .
what about the side inform that we ar told about the outcom of the experi ?
well we're told that the sum of the face valu is eight .
notic we're not told what the outcom is .
we're not told what each of the two di ar show .
what we ar told is that thi , whatev the outcom is it fall into thi categori .
thi is the inform we have .
now the sum of the two face valu be eight , will constrain the possibl pair to five in number .
six and two , five and three , four and four .
three five , or two and six .
there ar exactli five possibl and no more .
now the two event at hand ar clear , we now need a probabl measur .
and again , the natur probabl measur here is combinatori .
the , we have a discret set , a finit set with <num> possibl outcom , and natur enough .
we assign an equal atom probabl , a on in <num> to each of these <num> possibl .
the other probabl ar by the peel to addit obtain by simpli ad up the atom probabl in each of these event , sinc a ha got .
eleven sampl point in it .
the chanc of a is now <num> <num> .
and sinc b ha got five sampl point in it , the chanc of b is now <num> <num> .
again a visual pictur might drive thi abstract home .
we can depict the sampl space in a six by six arrai of number .
thi is omega .
there ar <num> element .
each squar here repres on possibl outcom .
the event a of interest to us , where there's at least <num> <num> , is obtain as the band around the edg in red , shown in the figur .
the chanc of a , then is , natur enough , <num> out of <num> .
thi is the unvarnish chanc that you get at least on ac , when you're told noth els about the outcom of the experi .
but wait , we're told someth about the natur of the outcom .
we ar told that the sum of the face valu is eight .
the event b is obtain as those five squar along a diagon in your figur .
onc you're told that b occur , none of the other element could have occur .
we're expung from the <num> possibl , <num> possibl .
the sampl space ha now been reduc effect to just b alon .
and in thi new sampl space , we have five possibl , and of these possibl , precis two trigger a .
the possibl , the first die show six , and the second die show two .
and the possibl that the fire die show two and the second die show six again , highlight with red border in your figur .
now onc you're told that thei'll be a thi is the entireti of a new sampl space .
to normal it properli , we had to ask ourselv now not just what ar the chanc of a among the univers of origin possibl , but what is the chanc of a among the reduc possibl that constitut b ?
the chanc of a now , given that b occur , and therefor we come to the conclus that given that the sum of face valu is eight .
the chanc of observ an ac at least on ac on the two face must inevit be two and five .
these simpl chanc experi in veri commonplac set , oddli allow us to identifi the kei element of how we wish to fold side inform formal into the abstract process .
for our purpos now , side inform is alwai provid .
when it is the present , in the form of an ancillari event .
the moment we specifi an ancillari event , the question then is how doe a target event , in thi case a , interact with the ancillari event b ?
ineluct , thei ar twin togeth and in thi twin aris a condit of factor insid inform .
so thi is the basi of the formal definit that will aris next .
we ar now readi for a formal definit of how to fold in side inform into the chanc process .
recal now that our experi with simpl exampl tell us that the wai we proce is alwai by provid inform in the form of the occurr of an ancillari event , let's sai b .
we have a target event a of primari interest to us , and a venn diagram encapsul the pictur quit nice .
so , we have a target event and an ancillari event , and now what matter , given that the ancillari even ha occur , is proportion that portion of the target event , which resid in the ancillari event .
now , let's formal thi .
we will sai the condit probabl of the target event a , given the occurr of an ancillari event b , of posit probabl .
in short , that's a mouth , so we'll simpli sai , the probabl of a given b .
we will denot it succinctli , mathemat , by us a bold font p for probabl , as alwai .
the target event a of interest to us , a vertic bar as a separ to tell us that there is inform aris , come , from an ancillari event , which follow the bar , that is b .
we ar take some liberti with notat here , becaus of cours , p stand for a probabl measur .
it is a set function .
the moment you see p , you anticip an argument which is a set , an event .
and now , i'm give you two event with a bar in between , but it's a harmless liberti .
we take thi object to mean someth veri specif .
colloqui , the proportion part of a that resid in b .
and formal , we defin the condit probabl of a given b to be the ratio of the probabl of the intersect of a and b , to the probabl of b .
now , befor we go on to test our understand and build more intuit for what thi definit is tell us , we should extract some immedi featur from thi veri simpl definit .
first , the chanc , or the probabl of b , aris in the denomin .
and from earli calculu , we know that divid by zero is forbidden .
the event of b ha to have strictli posit probabl .
what if b ha zero probabl ?
well , in thi case , a condit probabl is simpli undefin .
in most elementari set , we will never encount the situat where we have an event of zero probabl .
but , when you do move into the continuum , we will find that there ar nontrivi event of zero probabl .
and in those instanc we ar go to have to adapt thi definit to do someth els .
but , for our purpos now , we will defin condit probabl of event onli when the side inform is in the form of an event of strictli posit probabl .
now the event a and b i've given you here , ar arbitrari event in some common probabl space .
we put no restrict on the natur of these event .
thei ar subset of the sampl space .
and in particular , the ancillari event , the side inform , b , could aris or could be specifi in ani fashion whatsoev .
so for exampl , b could be form from intersect , union , other set oper on other event .
b could be a composit event .
it make littl matter .
at the end of the dai , we have a subset , and we're condit on the occurr of that subset .
on final featur we should extract from the stori is that , again , we have two event , a and b .
what if we revers the order ?
what if b becom a target event , and we're given ancillari inform , side inform , in the form of the occurr of a .
the definit will immedi tell us that in gener , condit probabl ar not symmetr with respect to the order of specif of these event .
in gener , the probabl of b given a is not the same as the probabl of a given b .
to settl understand , write down what the probabl of b given a is .
and then ask yourself , under what condit can the two condit probabl be the same ?
paus and see if you write it down .
let's see if you came up with these answer .
the probabl of b given a .
recal the definit sai , the wai we write on a condit probabl is in the numer , you write down the intersect probabl .
in the denomin , you write down the probabl of the ancillari event , the side inform .
and so the probabl of b given a is a ratio of the probabl of b intersect a , to the probabl of a .
now , if you look at the two formula , you find that thei're not the same .
the numer ar inde the same .
intersect is a commut oper .
you can do it ani order .
so , the chanc of a intersect b is the same as the chanc of b intersect a .
but the denomin ar rather differ .
in gener , a and b need not have the same probabl .
it's indic visual in your figur , but i've shown you a and b have differ size and shape .
but , when can these two ratio be the same ?
well , the necessari and suffici condit is immedi , that the denomin have to be the same , and therefor , the probabl if b given a is equal to the probabl of a given b , if and onli if a and b have the same probabl .
we're not sai that a and b ar the same event , we're just sai that thei have the same probabl .
okai , now we have a definit under our belt .
we should immedi just settl concept to test our understand of the definit .
so let's start with a fairli artifici exampl .
all right , thi is design pure to run through the algebra to make sure we understand what the definit is sai .
so , let us start with a sampl space of ten element .
let call them on , two , three , four , up to ten .
if you wish , you can think of thi as an experi where we throw a ten side die , with the number on through ten inscrib on the face .
natur enough , for the simpl styliz experi , i'll assum that thi ten side die ha no bia toward ani face .
in other word , we ar randomli select an element from on through ten .
or in still other word , the mass function associ with the probabl measur for thi problem is uniform .
it put equal mass of on and ten on each of the ten face .
we've take anoth liberti with notat , and we've done thi again in the past .
to specifi the probabl measur in these simpl finit case , as we know , all we requir is the mass function which give us the atom probabl for everi singleton set .
formal , we should sai , here is a singleton set , the element i .
and then there is a set .
the probabl , natur enough , we put round bracket around that set .
that's how we defin probabl measur .
the probabl measur is a set function which take a set as an argument .
but thi unnecessarili complic our notat .
now we have bracket curli and round float all over the place .
where there's no chanc of ambigu , we'll simpli drop the round bracket .
and we'll sai the probabl measur p of the set which aris in the curli bracket follow it , in thi case a singleton set , i , is <num> in <num> .
now we've got the sampl space , we've got the probabl measur .
to comput gener probabl , we simpli appeal to addit and simpli sum atom probabl .
what ar the event of interest ?
well , let's put togeth just thi grab bag of event .
there's noth particularli insight about the wai i've construct these event .
thei're just set .
the target event a is a set compris of the element <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> .
and i'm give you three other possibl event which could serv as ancillari event for the purpos of commun side inform about what the experi actual happen .
so i've given you three more event b , c , and d with variou subset as i've given you there .
and your problem now is to evalu the condit probabl of a given that b ha occur , a given that c ha occur , a given that d ha occur .
and final , a given a composit event b intersect c ha occur .
paus the lectur and work your wai through thi to allow you to settl concept befor you turn to the next slide , and to the answer .
all right .
now that you ar back , let's verifi what you've got .
we should begin by write down the variou event of interest and their probabl .
so let's start with a sampl space .
the sampl space omega compris , is compris of the univers set of the integ <num> through <num> .
normal of probabl measur tell us that thi entir set is certain .
it ha got probabl on .
the target event a is compris of the element <num> through <num> .
it ha five element .
we ar deal with a combinatori set .
so for the chanc of a by addit is <num> in <num> , or <num> in <num> .
b , c , d , and b intersect c ar the ancillari event of interest to us , which ar cast side inform upon the problem at hand .
each of these event now can be identifi with a particular subset .
and each of these subset then will give rise to a particular probabl .
<num> in <num> for b , <num> in <num> for c , <num> in <num> for d .
and b intersect c is compris of three element , <num> , <num> , and <num> .
and therefor , it ha got a chanc of <num> in <num> .
good .
now we've got the target event , the ancillari event of interest , and now we need to comput further event which resid in the intersect between the target event a and the variou ancillari event .
a intersect b , a intersect c , a intersect d , and a intersect with the event b intersect c .
but again , intersect is an associ oper .
the order of oper doe not matter .
you just simpli write it down as a intersect b , intersect c .
and now we have four more set and their associ probabl .
we're now all readi and equip to write on variou condit probabl .
so let's start by write down the first .
the probabl of a given b .
then the probabl of a given c .
the probabl of a given d .
and the probabl of a given the occurr of the event b intersect c .
okai , at thi point there's , there's noth veri deep about these manipul , it's pure arithmet .
and whatev number turn out , turn out .
at thi point we have just churn through the definit mill , if you will , and provid numer answer .
but we should paus , stop , take a look at these answer and see whether thei cast ani light upon the situat .
whether thei tell us someth more about what our formal definit is do .
and when you look at these particular numer answer , we notic someth interest .
we start with the unvarnish probabl of a be <num> in <num> .
we discov that condit on the occurr of b , the chanc of a ha not chang .
b , appar , is not alter the chanc of a .
it is still <num> in <num> .
but condit on d , the chanc of a ha decreas .
in fact , it's <num> now .
wherea , condit on c , the chanc of a ha increas to <num> and <num> .
veri interest .
what about condit on b intersect c ?
remark , perhap , the chanc of a ha now increas even further to <num> in <num> .
wow , that is veri interest .
thi is a polit edg , and we need slogan to encapsul such an edg .
and so here's a slogan for us .
a , a salutari observ that is alwai worth keep in mind .
our definit of condit probabl is veri , veri simpl .
it's a ratio of an intersect probabl to an unvarnish probabl .
but , condit probabl can affect nativ unvarnish probabl in unanticip wai .
is there gender bia in admiss in elit univers ?
a question like thi is fraught with cultur signific , with ethic and moral issu , and possibl a legal liabil .
in <num> at the univers of california at berklei , <num> of male applic were admit into graduat studi , while <num> of femal applic were admit to graduat studi .
thi appear to be incontrovert evid that men were favor over women in admiss .
a studi wa done on berklei admiss data , by bickel , hammel , and o'connel , and publish in <num> .
and the conclus were possibl paradox .
so let us explain , and figur out what the set wa that thei discov .
we shall us the berkelei studi as a guidelin .
and , of cours , a modern univers will have sever thousand of applic and a vast number of possibl depart into which these applic will appli .
and , it'll be difficult to sift our wai through all these , a myriad of complex .
let us borrow from the berkelei studi and imagin a sanit view of an applic process in a mythic univers , and two stereotyp driven fanci depart , sai , the depart of social warfar and the depart of machismat .
so in thi made up studi , there ar <num> applic , <num> men and <num> women .
the women appli in a number of <num> to the depart of social warfar .
and of the <num> applic , femal applic to social warfar , <num> were admit .
<num> women appli to the depart of machismat , and <num> were admit .
on the side of the men , <num> men appli to the depart of social warfar , <num> wa admit .
<num> men appli to the depart of machismat , and <num> were admit .
now if we aggreg thi data for the entir admiss process , we find that cumul <num> out of <num> women were admit to graduat studi in thi fiction univers , while <num> men out of <num> were admit to thi univers .
and when we look at the admiss ratio , we find that for femal applic , roughli <num> were admit .
and of the male applic , roughli <num> were admit .
thi is in favor of the men by about two and a half men to each woman .
it appear to have contain incontrovert evid that there is a strong bia in favor of the men .
but wait a minut , let's take a more fine grain look at thi pictur .
let us take a look and now add the admiss inform to the individu depart .
now when you look at social warfar , <num> out of <num> women were admit for an admiss rate of <num> , <num> out of <num> men were admit for an admiss rate of <num> .
in machismat , <num> out of <num> women were admit for an admiss rate of <num> .
and <num> out of <num> men were admit for an admiss rate of <num> .
and on find , look at these ratio , that rather unfairli , these inequ have chang direct , women ar almost twice as like to have been admit in thi made up studi for each individu depart .
but , men ar more than twice as like to have been admit to the univers .
a paradox .
or , is there on ?
on closer examin , on find the explan of the seem paradox .
women in thi studi were much more like to appli to a much more select depart .
and so even though women were more like to admit to each of the individu depart , collect fewer women were admit .
thi illustr the peril of jump to conclus by a rough and readi aggreg of data willi nilli .
in thi instanc , an aggreg of data conceal essenti evid that women in the studi were appli to more select depart and as a consequ , fewer women were admit .
it would be worth put some notat and mathemat framework around it so that we can see thi in fair and just proport .
so let's look at the studi again anew , and at thi time let's try to identifi a proper probabl space and a model for chanc for thi pictur .
and so , what is a sampl space for the problem ?
well , the sampl space constitut the <num> applic to thi univers , <num> men , <num> women .
what constitut a chanc experi here ?
imagin now we have thi pool of <num> applic .
we reach in blindli and pick an applic at random from the pool .
random select impli a combinatori set where ani on of the <num> applic is equal like of select .
now onc you select an applic , certain attribut of the applic now will becom visibl .
first , at a high level , wa that applic admit to studi or to studi at the univers or reject ?
let's call it event a .
a the event that the applic chosen randomli wa admit .
a complement , that the event that the applic wa reject .
that applic could be male or femal .
let's call w the event that the chosen applic wa a woman .
w complement then mean that the chosen applic wa a man .
and that applic could appli to on of two depart .
let s repres the event that the applic appli to the , to the depart of social warfar .
let s complement therefor denot the event that the applic appli to the depart of machismat .
now here is a fine grain view , a depart specif view , of the applic process .
what we discov is that the probabl that the applic is admit , given that the applic is a woman and appli to the depart of social warfar , exce the probabl that the applic is admit .
given that the applic is a man appli to social warfar in odd ratio of <num> to <num> .
likewis , we find that the probabl that the applic is admit given that it is a woman appli to machismat , the second line in the pictur .
exce that of the chanc of the applic be admit given that it is a man appli to the depart of machismat in the odd of <num> to <num> .
now thi is the fine grain department specif view , and these condit probabl captur the essenc of a mathemat observ .
what about the aggreg view for the univers at larg ?
remark , we find that it is possibl in spite of the department tendenc go in on direct , for the aggreg tendenc to go in the opposit direct .
the chanc that the applic is admit , given that it is a woman , is smaller than the chanc of the applic be admit , given that it is a man .
the odd of <num> to <num> , remark .
thi paradox ha been known for a long time .
for more than a centuri , it wa remark by yule in <num> .
but it wa articul readili with a handsom rang of interest and intrigu exampl by e . h .
simpson in <num> , and therefor it's name after simpson .
the paradox aris in a multitud of common set .
replac thi fiction univers by , for exampl , the reaction of women and men to two differ drug treat in a particular ailment .
sai we find that women do better than the men on each of the two drug .
doe that mean that women do better overal ?
if you aggreg the inform , you might find that fewer women benefit than men do , and it's the same paradox .
again here , the fine grain inform is of relev , and accru aggreg here , conceal and distort the pictur .
we could replac the sex , the gender by , for exampl , peopl from two differ ethnic commun , given two differ drug to treat a particular ailment .
and again , we have a basi for a seem paradox .
of cours , in that instanc , you might find that a more efficaci drug is given in larger percentag to a particular ethnic commun becaus of econom or cultur constraint .
and a less efficaci drug is given to the other commun in larger proport , again , becaus of these econom or cultur constraint .
there ar set also where the aggreg might have more inform than the fine grain in the pictur .
for exampl , imagin now that we ar look at our return in a financi set for a portfolio of a given size .
and let's sai we ar look at invest in two differ invest vehicl , in differ proport .
in on case we find that for each particular port invest vehicl , on strategi , on proport doe better than the other .
but in aggreg , the second strategi doe better than the first .
now in a pictur like thi , arguabl , the aggreg is perhap of first import to the individu .
becaus , on might ask , what happen to my entir portfolio in term of my return on invest overal ?
how is my wealth grow ?
as oppos to , how ar the individu segment go , grow ?
these paradox have seem to appear on a routin basi in the popular new , almost on a yearli basi , right ?
for our purpos , it's an amus stori .
it point to a cautionari tale that on should be care in how we aggreg or lump inform togeth .
and it reinforc our slogan , condit affect event probabl in strang and wondrou wai .
we have now come to a right understand of how to fold insid inform about the occurr of an event into our probabilist framework .
befor we summar , we should take a look at the definit again and examin it to see whether we can draw ani more conclus from it .
so recal that a condit probabl of a target of a dai given anoth event b is given by a simpl ratio .
colloqui , we think of thi express to repres the proport chanc of a within b .
ineluct to the definit is fold in the idea of a joint occurr .
a conjunct of two event .
that portion of a that resid insid b .
suppos we chang perspect and focu on the intersect and let us see then what come out of thi .
thi is an illustr of how sometim what look like drab mathemat manipul can sometim lead to surpris observ , intuit , and result .
so , let's begin with the definit of condit probabl and clear the denomin by multipli left and right hand side by the probabl b .
we now get an ident for the probabl of an intersect of a conjunct .
now let's rewrit what you've got .
here's a good place to pick up your pencil and paper and write the equat down to make sure you intern what we ar do .
so , we're clear denomin .
and identifi the probabl of an intersect of two event on the left hand side as a product of two probabl on the right .
a condit probabl of on given the other , time the probabl of the ancillari event .
of cours , we could equal well have revers the role of a and b here , becaus intersect ar commut .
you could do them in ani order .
so , we could over to the right hand side just as well as the probabl of b given that a occur time the probabl that a occur .
okai , but no matter , for our purpos what you've now got is an express for an intersect probabl .
aha .
i wonder if we can milk thi and get other express for more complic intersect .
the next step might be to consid the intersect of three event .
well let's consid what happen .
suppos we have event a , b and c in the probabl space .
i want to sai someth about a probabl of a intersect b intersect c .
if we group two of the event .
sai , b and c togeth .
well , then we have a composit event b intersect c .
if the rule of b is now taken over by b intersect c , we simpli appli the definit of condit probabl and write thi down as , the probabl of a given thi ancillari event of b intersect c , time the probabl of b intersect c .
aha , but wait a minut !
on the right now i've got the probabl of the intersect of two event .
and the first line tell me i can write that in term of condit probabl and at the end i now have a chain of condit probabl .
the probabl of a given b and c .
time the probabl of b given c time the probabl of c .
and interestingli , we can write down the probabl of an intersect of three event as a chain of condit probabl .
thi is sometim call the multipl rule but chain seem to be more a properti , the chain condit probabl togeth .
of cours the moment you've done three , now there's no reason why we can't do more than three .
so suppos we now have n event , a1 , a2 , through an and we ar interest in the conjunct of all of them .
in the intersect of all of them .
we proce just as we did for the case of three event .
we first group the last n minu <num> event togeth .
actual or ani n minu <num> event togeth .
condit occurr of that composit event .
and now we've got a probabl of n minu <num> of them .
oh , but that's easi .
condit again on n minu <num> of them .
and go down the line we get a chain of condit probabl , a1 given the occurr of a2 through an , a2 given the occurr of a3 through an , and so on .
an minu <num> given the occurr of an , and then you ar left with noth except the occurr of an .
and there you ar .
we've now got a chain of condit probabl which captur the essenc of a conjunct probabl .
of cours the last equat is a long out form .
and it's take you awhil to write thi down .
okai .
we can encapsul thi in a compact mathemat terminolog us a product oper .
and i can write thi whole thing down .
mean exactli what we've written here , in thi compact form .
the probabl of an intersect of an event a1 through an can be return as a product of condit probabl where the index j run from <num> through n .
and we're interest in the product probabl of aj given the event aj plu <num> through an .
the last condit probabl here is just the probabl of an itself .
okai ?
and so here's a compact wai of write down thi chain formula , but i hope you agre with me that the chain formula is veri mnemon .
it's veri easi to rememb the condit on the last group and you get the first on , then condit on the next to last group and get the second on .
and you keep go down until you've exhaust all the thing you want to condit .
now thi is just mathemat manipul , and you might wonder , well is thi ani us whatsoev ?
okai so you've got a formula it look a littl clumsi , it look awkward , but is it ani us whatsoev .
the answer depend upon the problem at hand .
in most of the applic we have seen so far , i've given you set where it is simpl to directli deduc what the probabl measur is , for exampl .
by write down atom probabl .
in instanc like that , it is simpl to deduc directli from the statement of the problem , conjunct probabl .
and onc you've got conjunct probabl , you can then comput condit probabl by the usual ratio .
but there ar set and there ar applic where it'll transpir that it is more natur to either defin the probabl measur implicitli in term of condit probabl .
or set where even when the probabl measur is specifi directli , it is easier to comput to the condit probabl first befor we comput the conjunct probabl .
i'll give you on exampl of the latter instanc now .
and i .
in tableau two , part on , we talk about a card , the card game bridg .
we talk about what constitut a bridg hand , and we comput commutatori probabl for such a hand .
let's run through the idea of a bridg hand again .
so the question at hand is the follow .
we ar go to deal a bridg hand from a standard pack of <num> card .
now in bridg , ac in the pack have a particular signific .
and so the question at hand is , ar ac distribut across four bridg player , in fair and equit fashion .
doe everybodi get an ac ?
now to remind ourselv , we ar deal with a pack of <num> card .
the card ar distinguish in four major suit , call spade , heart , diamond , and club .
in each suit we have <num> card label , ac , two , three , four , up to king .
in spade , in heart , in diamond and in club .
we plai bridg by distribut these card <num> card a player to four player .
tradition call north , south , east and west .
now when you distribut a card hand like thi .
we can attack thi problem pure communitori by count .
i'll let you have at it .
our tact here is go to be a littl differ .
we're go to be a littl moe subtl and edg up to the event at hand by a condit argument .
now to do thi , we first should formal what is our sampl space ?
what ar our ideal outcom ?
let's begin with thi .
the sampl space here .
i'm go to alloc <num> card to north , <num> card to east , <num> card to south , <num> card to west .
we ar go to assum a random shuffl .
which mean that all order of the <num> card ar equal like .
which mean that onc you do the shuffl , north get <num> card , east <num> , south <num> , west <num> and if i can tell you what order these <num> , <num> , <num> card ar arriv at , then you've got on bridg hand .
now , the combinatori set here sai that all permut of these card ar equal like .
now there's a mind boggl number of permut , <num> factori permut .
everi permut correspond to an atom in our game , and the chanc of that atom is on in <num> factori .
now what is a bridg hand here ?
each permut give rise to a particular sequenc in which the card were administ .
but within on player grasp , the particular order of the card make littl matter .
it onli matter which <num> card he ha obtain .
sinc there ar <num> factori permut of the card for each player , there ar <num> factori to the power <num> possibl permut which result in the same bridg hand .
and therefor , the chanc of everi distinct bridg hand is <num> factori to the power of <num> divid by <num> factori .
it's still an infinitesim small number .
there's a veri vast number of possibl bridg hand .
now , what ar the event at hand ?
well the target event is clearli the event where the distribut of the card c1 to three set <num> , c14 through c26 and so on is such that in north there is an ac somewher in there , in east there's an ac somewher in there .
in south there's an ac somewher in there .
and in west , there is an ac somewher in there .
the ac of heart , spade , diamond and club ar distribut on per player .
now let's edg up to thi target event on step at a time .
now manifestli , the ac of spade ha to go somewher .
so let's target a minut , let's call it a of spade .
to mean that the ac of spade goe to some player .
of cours , thi is certain .
the ac of space is just a synonym for the entir sampl space .
everi bridg hand will deal the ac of spade to somebodi .
now that's okai , thi is just a start point , that's right .
let's defin a slightli more subtl event .
ac a of spade and heart to mean that the ac of spade and heart go to two distinct player .
no on player get both .
hm , okai thi is clearli a sana quinon if everybodi is go to get on ac .
here's a start point .
let's defin a of spade , heart , and diamond , to repres the event all permut .
for which the ac of heart , spade , and diamond go to three distinct player .
no player get two of these ac .
and final , the target event .
let a of spade , heart , diamond , and club repres the event that the four ac each go to a distinct player , everybodi get an ac .
now , these ar clearli event which ar relev for the problem at hand , but there ar certain inclus in these set .
and we can veri quickli figur out what these inclus ar .
if everybodi get an ac , then clearli the ac of spade , heart and diamond have to go to three separ player , and therefor the last event is a subset of , is contain in the event a of spade , heart and diamond .
but if three player get spade , heart and diamond , on a piec .
then it must be the case that the ac of spade and heart go to two distinct player .
and if the ac of spade and heart go to two distinct player , then it must be the case that somebodi get ac of spade .
which is of cours the entir sampl space .
oh good , so now we have an inclus relationship .
each of these inclus , on contain in the other .
let's see if we can parlai thi , thi understand into a simpl calcul .
so , you're go to util a chain rule , you're go to util a understand of these set relationship , these inclus relationship , and an understand of how a bridg hand is distribut .
let's start by write down the probabl of the event at hand .
now the event that everi player get an ac .
becaus of the inclusion relationship , thi is the smallest of the three event about it .
and therefor the intersect of the four event is exactli the smallest of them .
and now you look at me and sai , oh thi is strang .
you want the probabl of an event and now you've complic it by introduc other thing .
but wait , there's a method in thi mad .
the event a of spade , heart , diamond , club .
a of spade , heart , diamond .
a of spade , heart .
a of spade .
stand in the row of four distinct event .
there happen to be a particular occlus relationship , which we'll util shortli .
but there ar four distinct event .
we could just as well have call them a , b , c and d .
we're look at the conjunct probabl of four event .
that suggest a chain argument .
we can write thi as the first event .
condit upon the occurr of the last three .
the second event condit upon the occurr of the last two .
the third even condit upon the occurr of the last on , and then the last event .
and so here's what our chain rule for condit probabl tell us .
oh , okai , it look like it's get more complic .
ar we make ani progress ?
we'll paus for a moment .
there ar certain inclus relationship .
so the event of a of spade , heart , and diamond is contain in both , a of spade , heart , and a of spade .
and therefor , the condit , the side inform of the first condit probabl collaps to simpli the smallest of those three set a of spade , heart and diamond .
likewis in the second of the condit probabl , the event a of spade and heart is manifestli contain in the entir sampl space , a of spade .
and therefor the intersect is just the smaller of the two , a of spade and heart .
oh , here is our problem specif understand which allow us to simplifi thi complex express into someth which is much more manag .
i now have system of condit probabl and that question is , in thi set , ar these condit probabl easi to evalu ?
let's paus and take a look at them on at a time .
let's start at the right .
what is the probabl of a of spade .
now a of spade mean that somebodi get ac of spade .
thi is equival to the entir sampl of spade becaus everi permut of your card will put the ac of space somewher .
somebodi will get an ac of spade .
thi is certain .
anoth wai of think about thi is , there ar <num> locat the ac of spade can go .
becaus of the combinatori symmetri in our probabl measur .
the ac of spade is equal like to be in ani on of those <num> locat .
and therefor , the probabl of the ac of spade is just <num> divid by <num> , or on .
okai .
that look easi .
let's take a look at the next on .
the probabl of the event a of spade and heart , given a of spade .
the probabl that two distinct player get the ac of spade and the ac of heart , on a piec .
given that , some player got ac of spade .
now let's see what is given .
the ac of spade ha land somewher in the pictur .
the moment is land there .
that posit is issu , it's forbidden for where the ac of heart can land up .
okai , so , on of the <num> locat is now forbidden for the ac of heart .
but more , we want the ac of heart to not just land where the ac of spade is but it can not land in ani of the <num> card of the player who ha pick the ac of spade .
and therefor , the ac of heart ha got onli <num> remain locat where it can land .
the symmetri of the problem tell you that all those <num> locat ar equal like , given that thei can not be in these <num> locat .
and therefor the probabl of a of spade and heart , given a of spade , is exactli <num> over <num> .
rememb on possibl is left out , it's not avail anymor .
and the remain <num> cannot be occupi if the ac of heart is to go somewher els .
argu along these line the probabl of ac a of spade , heart , diamond , given a of spade and heart .
thei ar given spade and heart .
spade is gone somewher .
heart is gone somewher els .
those two locat cannot be where the ac of diamond land .
so ac of diamond ha got a total of <num> locat .
from <num> you're take two awai .
but of those <num> locat , <num> plu <num> , <num> locat ar forbidden .
and therefor there ar onli <num> locat left for the ac of diamond to land safe , and so there ar <num> out of <num> .
and final , the remain ac of club is go to leav <num> locat left .
onc you've place the other three ac out of <num> locat .
notic how eleg and simpl these condit probabl ar .
onc you understand what exactli the chanc creation mechan is , and put everyth togeth , we opt in the follow .
the first condit probabl .
<num> possibl for the ac of club out of <num> ar remain , have place the ac of spade , heart and diamond .
<num> possibl for the ac of diamond given that out of the <num> possibl , given that you place the ac of spade and heart , <num> possibl for the ac of heart .
given out , out of the <num> odd possibl , given that you have place ac of spade .
and all <num> possibl for ac of spade .
you evalu thi numer , and it come out to about <num> .
in a bridg game , veri roughli , <num> of the time .
in <num> of bridg hand , you will expect to find that each player ha on ac .
you could try do thi problem directli , us enumer direct communitori method .
and see if you rediscov the answer .
it is not at all hard .
but the mode of think is rather differ when you do an enumer directli along those line .
the idea here is that a proper identif of site inform can simplifi express , can simplifi comput .
let us summar our find todai .
summari of tableau <num> , part <num> .
characteris side inform in chanc experi , and the role of condit probabl .
side inform in our chanc experi , is alwai fold into the fabric by the specif of the occurr of an ancillari event .
it's a , b .
we defin the condit probabl of a given that an event b of posit probabl ha occur .
to be inward the proport part of a which resid in b , and formal as a math , as a matter of mathemat definit .
the ratio of the probabl of the intersect of a and b to the probabl of the ancillari of a to b .
it's a veri clean and simpl definit , thi is someth that you should rememb .
from the definit aris anoth piec of insight .
the definit of condit probabl is endelect intwin with the idea of conjuct probabl .
so we could write down conjunct probabl , probabl of intersect , in term of a chain of condit probabl .
either thing of thi kind ar occasion us , when it transpir that the problem set make comput of condit probabl straightforward , where the comput of conjunct probabl might not be quit so simpl , might be more opaqu .
thi is now the of condit probabl that we will deal with .
in our next tableau , we will return to our guid principl of addit , on of the pillar on which thi entir scienc of probabl rest .
and we shall see how condit probabl put thi principl in a new and beguil light .
we shall discov a panopli of applic .
subtl , deep but elementari .
aris out of thi veri simpl exercis of thi principl .
so thi will be on tap for our next lectur .
tableau <num> , part <num> .
a first look at independ .
probabilist independ , also call statist independ is the fundament principl in the theori of chanc .
thi is the principl which give a subject much of it color it vibranc .
and it turn out to be subtl and deep and inform some of the deepest result that aris in the subject .
we shall begin our explor of independ in it's simplest set , the idea of independ event .
as alwai , we will begin by first look at simpl exampl to build intuit .
much , in much of mathemat it is true that some of the deepest and most subtl idea have at the heart , eleg and simpl guid principl .
and we'll see that such is the case , with independ .
onc we have the idea for a concept under our belt , our next step is to promptli gener and abstract the set .
and look at it in a much more gener set , and come up with a formal mathemat definit of what the object under consider is .
we should then of cours promptli explor the mathemat nuanc that result .
what ar the properti ?
what ar the featur of such a definit ?
and , make sure we understand what we've put togeth , what we've cobbl togeth .
the next step would be to appli the definit in set of more complex , to test our understand of what is go on .
to bolster our intuit by stretch and ask question for which raw intuit seem to be unprepar .
with that under our belt , we will conclud by look at more ramif of the definit .
so here is our game plan .
let's promptli jump in and start by ask what ar the guid principl behind what we could call a mathemat or probabilist idea of independ .
the idea is veri veri simpl .
it resid in the multipl idea that independ possibl multipli .
let me take thi banal trite statement and expand it to give it some context .
so , imagin that we had an alphabet of three letter and five number .
we're go to put togeth letter number pair .
how mani possibl ar there ?
now , if you look at the tabl we put togeth , let's introduc a littl bit of notat .
let's introduc an uppercas gothic font , a , to repres the letter a , b , and c .
and , you can think of thi as an alphabet , a small alphabet of three letter .
and let's us an uppercas gothic b to repres an alphabet now of number <num> through <num> .
if you arrang these in a tabl , letter in the row , number in the column , then pair of letter number will be repres by what you see in the tabl and .
we will call the collect of letter number pair the cartesian product of a with b .
just notat terminolog .
a cross b just mean all system of pair .
a fundament principl of arithmet tell us that in the tabl we have exactli <num> x <num> , or <num> entri .
tho to integr to recogn in multipl tabl .
thi is what the tabl of entri exist .
so if you have three possibl for the first alphabet a .
five possibl for the second alphabet b .
there ar <num> possibl .
<num> x <num> possibl for the pair , of a and b .
at heart , it's a veri simpl , eleg , beauti principl .
it's a basic principl of count .
the first element is specifi independ .
i us the word in it casual or english sens , of the second element .
what i mean by that is , the specif of the first entri doe not affect , in no wai affect , the specif of the second entri .
if that is the case , then there ar a total of <num> x <num> possibl entri .
at heart , we have a multipl tabl of possibl .
let us immedi put a chanc context around thi veri simpl elementari observ .
and natur , inevit , thei go back to the toss of a coin .
let's start with a veri simpl experi where we toss a coin twice .
befor we deconstruct thi , we should , it is natur here , of cours to break up experi into the first toss and the second toss .
you can think of the alphabet for the first toss , gothic a , to compris , is compris of two symbol .
head or tail h or t .
similarli , the alphabet for the second choic happen to be the same .
it's again a head or a tail .
let's keep the letter separ for the time be , a and b .
right .
to give ourselv eventu the potenti for deal with differ alphabet at differ trial .
what is a sampl space for the experi ?
well , a coin is toss twice .
which mean you have to specifi what happen in the first toss , what happen in the second toss .
natur , there ar four possibl .
so the sampl point ar hh , ht , th , and tt .
where for exampl , for definit , we specifi the result of the trial in the order of the trial .
thi , formal , is the cartesian product of a with b .
the system of pair .
let's put togeth some event of interest to us .
let us sai a is the event that the first toss result in a head .
well , in term of the sampl space , rememb , an event is a subset of the sampl space .
the sampl space is a cartesian product .
it is a system of pair .
therefor , in that system of pair we identifi those pair where the first symbol is h .
and therefor , we find that a is compris of two element hh and ht .
similarli an event b , that a second toss result in a tail , is compris of two sampl point , ht and tt .
what is the probabl measur ?
natur enough , we ar deal with a combinatori set , all possibl ar equal like , so we deal with an atom mass function .
which place equal mass <num> <num> , on each of the four possibl .
let's now do some calcul .
of cours , there's the tri and simpl exampl , so the calcul ar easi .
the probabl of a .
well , there ar two possibl for a , addit tell us the chanc of a is two in four .
or inde as an intuit , natur and just , the chanc of , of a head on the first toss is <num> in <num> .
the chanc of a tail , on the second toss likewis , is <num> in <num> , or again , <num> in <num> .
what about the chanc of the event , a and b ?
the conjunct of a and b , thi result in a head in the first trial , a tail the second trial .
and so a intersect b is compris of a , a set with a singl element .
a singleton .
an atom .
and that term is ht .
the probabl of thi natur is on in four .
but wait , the on in the numer correspond to select an h from the first alphabet and a t from the second alphabet .
there's on wai of select a h from ht .
there's on wai of select an h for a t from ht .
and therefor , <num> in the numer is <num> time <num> .
the <num> in the denomin tell you how mani wai you can sai , select the first element .
there ar two wai .
two is the size of the first alphabet .
and there ar two wai of select the second element .
there ar two time two wai of select the pair .
all right .
thi look veri trite and simpl .
which mean that <num> in <num> is the same as <num> in <num> time <num> in <num> .
identifi the first half of the probabl of a .
the second half of the probabl of b .
and a multipl tabl is equival to thi rule that the probabl of a intersect b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
we've done noth more than construct a multipl tabl .
the languag is more formal , but at the end of it we've got an ident .
let's hold on to thi ident , and take a look at anoth exampl in thi vein .
and let's sai we look at card thi time .
we're go to deal with a standard pack of <num> card .
recal that in a standard pack , card ar character by two featur .
first , a suit .
there ar four suit , commonli call spade , heart , diamond , club with the symbol i've shown you .
and each suit appear in thirteen rank .
usual call the number <num> , <num> , <num> , up through <num> , togeth with the special letter jack , queen , king , and ac .
the experi at hand is , a card is drawn randomli from a standard pack .
what is a card ?
well , a card is a pair of attribut , a suit and a rank .
if you think of gothic a as an alphabet of suit , gothic b as an alphabet of <num> rank , then a card is an element in a cross b .
you specifi the suit and the rank .
you can make thing a littl more complex , it , it appear to be a littl more burdensom than is need , but thi kind of abstract will set the stage for a gentl definit , so bear with me .
okai .
so draw a card mean draw a suit and a rank .
let's put togeth some event .
let a be the event that the card drawn is a spade .
rememb an event is a subset of the sampl space , so you're go to have to give me a subset of pair .
which subset ?
well , the first element ha to be a spade .
the second element can be ani of the thirteen rank , and so you list all <num> possibl and thi give you the spade suit .
that is your everydai .
let b be the event .
now , the card drawn is an ac .
again it's a subset of the sampl set , which subset of pair ?
well , the second element ha to be an ac , but the first element can be anyth you like .
it can be ani of the four suit .
good , now we've got b .
what is the probabl measur ?
natur enough , again we have a combinatori set , we ar look at the simplest case to build intuit .
everi card ha an equal probabl of be drawn , so if you're look at an atom measur which place mass <num> <num> , on each item , on each card .
good .
veri quickli , now let's comput probabl .
what ar the chanc of a ?
veri quickli .
a ha got <num> element in it .
the chanc of a is <num> and <num> or <num> in <num> .
what about the chanc of b ?
well , b ha got four element in it .
the chanc of b is <num> in <num> or <num> in <num> .
what about the chanc of a intersect b ?
but what is a intersect b ?
that mean that a card drawn is first an , a spade and second an ac .
but there is precis on card in the intersect , which is the ac of spade .
and therefor the probabl of a intersect b is <num> in <num> .
elementari simpl .
but , paus for a moment .
let's pass the numer and the denomin on the right .
the <num> in the numer repres all the outcom that ar favor for the event a intersect b .
how do you stitch an , a favor event togeth ?
well , thi mean that , in the first draw if you like , from the first alphabet you drew a spade .
and in the second draw from the second alphabet you drew an ac .
there is precis on spade in the alphabet gothic a .
there's precis on ac in the alphabet gothic b .
therefor on is decompos on time on .
these ar real product .
elementari and simpl .
what about <num> ?
well , there ar four element in the first alphabet of , of suit .
and <num> element in the second alphabet of rank .
so <num> is natur <num> x <num> .
and therefor , <num> over <num> can be decompos into a product again , of on fourth time on thirteenth .
identifi the first of those probabl with a probabl of a .
the second with a probabl of b , and again , we've discov a rule of product .
the probabl of a intersect b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
a student mai justli complain that i'm make a mountain out of a mole hill .
you put all thi elabor in there to discov a multipl tabl .
but thi simpl idea is at the heart of a gener principl .
and thi we will turn to next .
we're now come to a right understand of what independ entail when we have three event .
independ is a rule of product and it's a rule of product if for everi arrang of intersect of these three event .
befor we proce to abstract and gener it yet further .
let's see , if we can draw some elementari conclus from thi definit .
so to test our understand i shall begin by pose a coupl of question .
deal with formal set manipul of the event a b and z .
you should paus a lectur when the question is post .
and see by scribbl on paper , whether you can come to an understand of what is be ask .
and whether inde you can make progress .
at thi point you ar go to be us set manipul and the basic definit , addit independ .
so , without further ado let's start with our set .
recal a b and c ar independ event in some probabl space , if four rule of product ar satisfi .
all four ar requir , if you want to conclud that a b and c ar independ .
we have seen , when we talk about independ in the previou lectur for a pair of event that a rule of product , sai the first equat , the probabl of a to section b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
is maintain if on or more of those two event ar replac by their complement .
in other word , the independ of a and b is the equival to the independ of a and b complement .
which is equival to the independ of a complement and b .
which in turn is equival to the independ of a compliment and b compliment .
what if in a set of three independ event we compliment on or perhap more of the event ?
we've alreadi check that rule of product ar maintain for pair .
so our question here come down to , what if we look at the intersect of three event , where on or more of the event a b or c ar replac by the a compliment .
thi would be a good time to paus a lectur and consid , for exampl , the probabl of a into section b into section c compliment .
and see whether you can , find a rule of product emerg by manipul .
you will need to us add .
you will need to us the definit of independ .
and just a smidgen of common or garden varieti algebra factor .
when you're readi , resum the lectur .
veri well then , let's begin .
so we want to look at the probabl of a intersect b , intersect , the compliment of c .
we immedi have recours to addit , though to be fair , it is slightli conceal .
think of the event a intersect b as a new event .
thi event can be partit into two disjoint piec .
that portion of a intersect b that li in c .
and that portion of a to section b , that li in c compliment .
addit tell us that the probabl of a to section b can be decompos into two piec .
that probabl of a to section b to section c togeth with the probabl of a to section b , a to section c compliment .
move the second of those to the right hand side and you've got the ident you see in front of you .
well now , well natur enough on the right we have probabl of intersect and independ immedi allow these probabl to devolv into rule of product .
and so , by applic directli of properti on and properti four of independ , we'll replac them by product .
we're now readi for just a smidgen of algebra .
there ar two term on the right and we find that the properti of a time the properti of b is common to both term .
natur enough , we factor these , thi product out , leav you in ro , round bracket , on minu the probabl of c .
uh huh !
but addit ride to the rescu yet onc more , c and c complement partit the entir sampl space .
and therefor the sum of the probabl of c and c complement as on or in other word , on minu the probabl of c is exactli ad to five with a probabl of c compliment .
and there you have it , a rule of product magic emerg again .
what conclus can we draw from thi ?
now , sure , we can now go ahead and look at what happen if we replac , let's sai , b by the complement and keep a and c .
or a by a complement , and replac b and c , but you of cours understand that replac a or b by their complement and keep the other two unfett will give you an argument in exactli the same line , and a rule of project will emerg .
the conclus then is , if you rule a product of these natur , with on , two , three , and four , the four relat for independ satisfi .
then if you complement ani on variabl , a new rule of product emerg .
but if is start with thi and you complement on more variabl .
let's sai b and you look at a , b compliment , and c compliment again a rule of product will emerg .
and if you compliment yet on more time and you look at a compliment , b compliment and c compliment a rule of product will emerg like a a creatur from the chrysali .
again , you have product emerg for all possibl combin and therefor , here's a slogan .
intersect probabl factor into product for ani combin of intersect of independend event or their complement .
the four basic result , the four basic ident which go in independ , will give you now a whole host of intersect probabl .
veri natur and veri intuit , if a , b and c ar independ in the sens , in ordinari languag , that thei do not impact or affect each other .
then , replac on by a complement or two , or all three complement , again , should not allow them to influenc each other and inde , thi is what we have discov .
let's try on more problem .
and thi time , let's start with event a , b , and c and combin some of them to creat a composit event .
what doe independ of a , b , and c sai about a new event , let's sai a union b and an event c .
again , natur enough , we anticip that if a and b ar independ of c , then a union b should also be independ of c , sure .
paus and see if we can verifi thi .
again , you would need addit in the guis of inclus and exclus .
you will need the distribut properti of intersect over union and you will need the definit of independ as a rule of product .
paus a lectur and see if we can make headwai befor you restart and resum .
so sure if we want to check the truth or falsiti of whether a union b is independ of c , we should start immedi by look at the intersect of the event a union b would sai .
the distribut properti of intersect over union will allow us to write thi as the probabl of the union of two set , a intersect c with b intersect c , okai ?
so now we have two set and thei ar union .
can we do someth with thi ?
independ at heart sai someth about the probabl of conjunct of intersect .
on the right , i've got a union of two object , so , and actual i would rather replac that express by an express involv intersect .
and addit through the guis of inclus and exclus that we saw in tableau of five show the wai .
rememb if you have two event , the probabl of the union can be obtain by sum the raw probabl .
but that will give you an over count and take awai the intersect of probabl .
and therefor , we now have an ident of the right .
the first two term enrol intersect .
and the third term , also is enrol in intersect but c appear twice .
we should do a littl algebra clean sinc the intersect that ha settl itself is itself .
so we obtain now is simpl ident .
the probabl b intersect c , ad to the probabl of b intersect c , from which you take awai the probabl of a intersect b , intersect c .
and now , thing ar right for independ .
on the right , you have express involv onli intersect probabl , and becaus independ give you product rule for all possibl conceiv intersect combin , we now have a factor .
i'll take a look at thi and sai well , okai , variou ten ar common here .
the term the probabl of c appear at each term on the right .
as mention of factor take it out of those term , leav in round bracket in front , the probabl of a plu the probabl of b , from which you take awai the probabl of a , a time the probabl of b .
all of these , of cours , multipli by the probabl of c .
all right , let's take a look at the term in round bracket .
the third express there is the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
but if a , b and c ar independ then sure a and b ar independ and thi is in fact the first relat that must be satisfi .
the probabl of a time the probabl of b is exactli identifi with the probabl of a intersect b .
thi is what independ give us for the pair a and b .
all right , you look at it and sai well , thi man is , is go crazi .
he is take someth which is neatli factor out , and he's now assembl it again and make it more complex .
but , of cours , there is a method in the mad .
let's take a good hard look at the term in their own bracket .
doe that look familiar ?
look at the second line .
we have an express just like that , and introspect tell us the thing the round bracket repres a probabl of a union .
thi wa addit via inclus and exclus .
the term in round bracket is exactli the probabl of a union b .
we're done .
take a look at the left , you have the intersect of two event , a composit event would sai .
on the right we have a product of probabl , that ar the composit event with a probabl of c .
we conclud inevit , that a union b , is independ of c .
and thi argument now work beautifulli and gener .
let's abstract the core principl that we've seen in our two exampl .
the first exampl said that if we have independ event and you complement to on or more , you still get independ event .
the second exampl sai in word that if you have independ event , and you form new event from some subgroup , then these new event ar independ of those that were left out .
and here now is a basi for a beauti compact slogan .
and thi now is true , more gener when you have independ event which ar finit in number or even countabl infinit in number .
suppos we have independ event ar not , ar not yet defin independ for more than three but we shall do so shortli , but let us anticip our set , imagin we have a famili of independ event .
suppos you break them up into group , which ar disjoint , which do not overlap .
and from each group , you construct a new event .
these new event ar engend from non overlap collect of these independ event .
then our conclus is that all these new event so construct from distinct disjoin subset of independ event ar also independ .
the moment you have independ , it's preserv under such manipul .
thi turn out to be a veri power and gener principl .
and of cours it's comfort that thi is exactli what we'd anticip in our vagu us of independ in ordinari languag .
if there ar thing out there which ar independ of thing out there , then result which depend upon these phenomena ar independ of result which depend upon these phenomena .
and a mathemat demonstr captur that intuit beautifulli .
our next step is to abstract and move beyond three event to a larg famili of event .
thu far , we have look at independ in the case of two event , and a multipl rule , a rule of product .
independ in the case of three event and now a famili of multipl rule look at variou slice .
two intersect at a time , three intersect .
we're not readi for an abstract gener definit which captur the kei idea that we have discov so far .
so , in our gener set , which promptli consid a gener finit famili of event , or more gener , a countabl infinit famili of event .
what doe the kei principl sai ?
that if you look at a famili of event , we want the rule of product manifest for intersect probabl for everi finit subgroup .
let us captur thi in a short compact mathemat descript and then we shall flesh it out so that we see exactli what the definit entail .
but here , independ ultim is a rule of product .
independ possibl multipli whichev wai we assembl them .
so , let's begin .
let us sai a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 and so forth , is a gener famili either finit or possibl even countabl infinit of event .
we will see that such a famili of event is independ .
if and onli if , for everi finit subset of integ indic , let's us blackboard bold j to repres them .
so j , blackboard bold , repres a subset of posit integ .
for exampl , <num> and <num> or <num> , <num> and <num> or ani other collect of integ .
for everi such collect of blackboard bold j integ , we requir that the associ event satisfi a rule of product .
the probabl of the intersect of those event , specifi by the index set blackboard bold j , is given by a product of the probabl of exactli those .
all right .
thi is , ha a great virtu of be nice and compact as a descript .
but of cours , we pai a price for compact in that .
it is not complet clear perhap exactli what all of thi entail .
so let's flesh it out , and see exactli what the definit is sai .
'kai ?
our definit mean the follow , pick a famili of event a sub j , j run through either a finit or an infinit rang .
the event ar independ mean that pick ani posit integ k .
pick ani collect of indic of k indic from your collect sai j1 , j2 , j3 and so on , jk .
pick k indic .
look at the event aj1 , aj2 , aj3 , and so on , ajk .
look at the probabl of the intersect of all those k event .
that intersect probabl must be the product of the individu probabl .
and thi statement must hold for everi choic of k and for everi collect of k indic that you select from a group .
let's flesh it out on more time .
thi mean , if for exampl k is <num> , that a1 and a2 intersect have a rule of product .
a <num> and a3 intersect have a rule of product .
a <num> and a4 intersect have a rule of product , and so on .
a <num> and a3 intersect satisfi a rule of product .
a2 and a4 intersect satisfi a rule of product and so on .
a3 intersect with a4 satisfi the rule of product and so on .
in other word , all pairwis intersect possibl , from mere finit or countabl infinit famili , must satisfi a rule of product .
everi pair of event must be pairwis independ .
but that's not enough .
onc you exhaust all possibl pair , and there could be an infin of them , we now look at all possibl tripl .
a1 , a2 and a3 intersect must satisfi a rule of product .
a1 , a2 and a4 intersect must satisfi a rule of product , and so on .
a2 , a3 , a4 intersect must satisfi a rule of product and so on .
all conceiv tripl intercept , intersect must satisfi a rule of product .
but that's not enough .
all quadrupl intersect must satisfi the rule of product .
all quintupl intersect must satisfi the rule of product .
in fact , a rule of product must be satisfi for everi finit subgroup .
thi is a formid number of condit .
how on earth ar we go to check whether a larg famili is actual independ .
if we were to check each of these by turn , labori , we would veri quickli give up .
fortun , in the simplest and most commonli occur of the set where independ come into plai , we will find that independ fall into a lap .
mean , that all these condit ar tightli and transpar satisfi with the necess of no check whatsoev .
thi is a set of independ trial and we will come to thi next .
the definit of independ is formid to sai the least .
and , a student might be forgiven for a feel of despair at check the bona fide of independ when you have a larg collect of event , possibl infinit in number .
fortun , in the simplest and most natur of the set in practic , independ fall into our lap virtual transpar for free , without the necess of ani check whatsoev .
thi is a set familiar to us from long experi with coin toss and the throw of a die , of repeat independ trial , lead to an idea of a compound experi that we shall call a product space .
so , let's go back directli to the coin toss game and the exampl we look at earlier .
we look at a toss of a coin three time and configur three event , a be that the first toss result in head , the , b be the event the second toss result in a tail , and c the event that a third toss result in a head , we conclud we ar in elementari calcul , that in fact a , b , and c ar independ .
let's try to extract what there wa in thi veri simpl set that is kei to the entir idea of independ .
the idea is captur in the concept of independ trial .
to get a right understand of what is go on here , we ar go to have to introduc a certain amount of notat .
so , bear with me while we start by put togeth what is at plai here .
there ar <num> trial .
what doe it impli ?
well , let's try to identifi what happen trial by trial and we're go to introduc some notat and we're go to color code it to keep the idea plainli visibl .
so , there wa a first toss .
call thi the first trial .
thi first trial result in a , a face for the coin , which is either head or tail .
in other word , the first trial result in an element from an alphabet of two possibl , head and tail .
let's call thi alphabet gothic a .
and let's color code it green .
just keep in mind that green for our purpos for thi slide repres the first trial .
now , thi is a chanc experi becaus the outcom of thi trial is not preordain .
we will natur think of the coin as fair and alloc an atom mass of on half to each of the two possibl , head or tail .
green head or green tail for the first trial .
likewis , the second trial result in again two possibl .
it turn out to be the same possibl .
thi is a set of repeat independ trial .
but , to keep the trial firmli in view and separ from each other , let's call thi alphabet now , b .
gothic b repres again a head or a tail , color code now blue , to sai okai , thi is a visibl indic .
thei're talk about second trial .
again chanc driven , we alloc an atom mass of on half , again to the singleton set consist of blue h or blue t .
the third trial , yet on more chanc to a possibl .
from an alphabet , let's call it gothic c , identifi now in a maroon color .
again , gothic c happen to have the same alphabet , but let's identifi it in color in maroon , as a maroon h and a maroon t .
and again , we assign atom probabl on half to each of these possibl .
okai , so we made a big forward roll about a veri simpl set , and we introduc some appar formid notat here .
but bear with me .
the chanc experi overal involv toss the coin thrice give rise to a compound experi .
and in thi compound experi , the sampl space is a space of tripl , identifi now , color code by trial on , trial two , trial three .
green , blue , maroon .
the moment you talk about an order tripl , we're talk about a cartesian product , formal speak , of gothic a with gothic b with gothic c .
order tripl ar the sampl point of thi compound experi .
it doesn't suffic to tell me what happen to the third trial .
if you just sai head , well that doesn't tell me what happen to the experi .
the experi requir a specif of each of the three trial .
in other word , tripl ar sampl point .
and therefor , we're now deal again with a discret set , in fact a finit set of eight possibl .
and therefor , it suffic to specifi the probabl measur .
to specifi atom mass function .
the atom here ar set of order tripl .
what should i alloc to each order tripl ?
natur the coin is fair .
i want to alloc a probabl on in eight , which i identifi as a product of the individu atom mass .
a green on half , a blue on half and a maroon on half .
we've decompos the atom mass probabl into a probabl of individu atom mass correspond to each of the trial .
thi is what at heart we mean by a repeat independ trial .
of cours , the listen look at me and sai , well , you're just make a lot about a statement that on eighth is on half time on half time on half .
eight is two time two time two .
but it's more , it's much , much , much more .
thi appar innocu arithmet factor is at the heart of thi deep and subtl concept that we call independ .
let's build our event on thi framework .
what wa a ?
the event wa that the first toss result in a head , which mean order tripl where the first element element is a green h .
the next <num> element , a blue second element and a maroon third element ar complet unfett .
thei can take ani of the four possibl , head head , head tail , tail head , and tail tail .
but the first element in the tripl ha to be a green h .
thi mean that the latter two element ar complet irrelev to the specif of the event a .
a is complet determin by on specif subset of the alphabet gothic a of result for the first trial .
the event a is complet specifi by , in fact , a veri simpl subset , a subset consist of a singl element , green h .
likewis , b is an event complet determin by a subset blue t of the alphabet gothic b .
and final , c is an event complet determin by a subset , maroon h , out of the alphabet gothic c .
thi wa the heart of independ .
the event a , b and c ar determin by individu trial which ar repeat and independ in the sens that a product measur for the conjoin or the composit compound experi is opt by a product of individu mass function .
let us immedi take thi understand and put it to good us in an abstract framework .
let us begin with the simplest of these framework where we have two independ trial .
and let's build up our notat step by step .
i should warn you that , ye , the notat is go to get a littl hairi , but there is go to be a valu at the end of all of thi .
at the end of all of thi , we're go to have a formal edific , a structur on which independ crop up , essenti , for free , okai ?
and thi is just a drought of well worth the candl .
so let's begin with a consider of a compound experi broken up into two individu chanc experi to independ trial .
the first trial result in a space of possibl result , we will call it gothic a .
and gothic a is a set of possibl , which i shall denot a sub j .
j run over a finit or contempli infinit rang .
so for exampl in a coin toss a1 wa head , in thi case a green head and a2 wa a green tail .
right , but now more gener if you imagin that the first trial in roll or through of a die then the ag is could be the number on through six .
the atom mass function here need not be combinatori anymor in gener .
in other word , we can assign atom probabl to individu mass for the first trial .
to the mass aj assign a chanc p subject .
excel , color code green , keep in mind , that thi repres thing for the first trial .
the experi is not conclud .
we're now go to do anoth chang experi .
a second individu chanc experi , a second trial .
it's result ar captur in a set that's call a gothic b and gothic b can be a finit or infinit set .
let's call the element of gothic b , b sub k , where k rang over variou finit or infinit rang .
we're go to call it b sub j instead a row by ani other name would smell as sweet .
we ar index j or k here just either defin of variou element in the set .
but it'd be nice and wise to keep the index repres the gener result of the first and second trial separ .
so , let's us an index j for the first trial , and index k for the second trial .
of cours j and k ar gener algebra variabl .
we color code thi let's sai by a blue color .
so gothic b and the variou element of gothic b ar the potenti result of the second trial .
it's a chanc driven experi a nd therefor we want to alloc chanc to each of these atom .
to the atom b sub k , suppos we alloc a chanc , q sub k .
noth sai that the experi have to be the same , for exampl we could throw a die , as the first trial and toss a coin as the second trial .
what matter is that thei've got a finit or contempli infinit rang of possibl and that for each of these possibl you've got an atom chanc .
p sub j in the first case , q sub k in the second .
now we're go to stitch these two togeth to form a compound experi .
we shall call the result sampl space a product space for natur reason and the result probabl measur a product measur .
the sampl space omega is now the cartesian product of gothic a with gothic b .
what doe thi mean ?
the sampl point ar order pair .
a sub j , result of the first trial , cover togeth with b sub k , result from the second trial , j and k rang of all possibl index in your index set .
and now , we natur have what we call a product space , you have taken a cartesian product of two trial .
what make thing independ is the specif of the probabl measur .
i'm give you a discret set , a finit or a countabl infinit set for thi compound experi .
it suffic to provid an atom ma function to everi atom and probabl .
what ar the atom in thi game here ?
the atom ar order pair , first trial , second trial .
suppos the first trial result in the result a sub j .
the second trial result in b sub k , then we have an atom .
a sub k , bk , to which we attach the probabl , p sub j time q sub k , thi is where the independ trial part of the experi come into plai .
independ trial mean that the compound probabl mass function is obtain by take as a product the individu mass .
onc you've got thi in plai , we can now start stitch togeth evid .
okai now we can need a littl more notat .
keep in mind the kei idea , if you're an event determin sole by the first trial , it should , if we've said our prayer at night and been veri good , be independ of an event specifi sole in term of the second trial .
we have now set up what the product space is for the compound experi .
a system of pair , a cartesian product and thi is the kei element .
what it meant to have a product measur ?
thi is at heart what we mean by independ trial .
the atom probabl multipli to give us the atom probabl for the order pair .
we should now set up event and again the kei idea is to set up event which depend upon separ trial and event a which depend onli upon the result of the first trial and an event b which depend sole on the result of the second trial .
we're go to need formal so notat to carri us through thi .
what doe it mean for an event to determin , or to be determin by the first trial ?
it mean that , that event is ultim determin by some sub group of possibl result of the first trial that occur .
we identifi the locat of that subgroup with let us blackboard j repres a collect of indic , repres locat of point in the set of possibl gothic a .
so , blackboard j repres sai thi locat , thi locat , that locat on , three , nine for exampl , okai ?
likewis we set up a system of possibl for the second trial .
blackboard k repres a collect of outcom result of trial two .
again these collect j and k could be finit or even countabl in finit .
okai , what doe it mean to sai that an event a depend onli on the first trial ?
well if a occur whenev the result of the first trial were ani of the tag locat identifi by blackboard j .
then we will sai that a wa determin by the first trial .
let's put thi in notat , the element tag by blackboard j in the first set gothic a , give you a subset of gothic a , call that gothic s .
just temporarili , as a nonc notat .
gothic s repres a collect , a sub collect of result of the first trial which ar identifi by a particular set of locat , a set of indic , blackboard j .
an event a , which is determin by just that set in a formal sens depend onli on trial on , what doe thi mean ?
suppos a is an event , a system of pair , where the first element a sub j is on of the tag element in gothic s .
the second result , the second element , b sub k , repres the result of the second trial , is complet unfett , can be anyth whatsoev .
the first element is constrain to a particular set , the second element is unconstrain .
natur we will sai a is determin by the first trial .
it occur or not occur is not depend upon the second trial , it onli depend on what happen in the first trial .
likewis , an event b , which depend onli on those result identifi or tag by the blackboard k set of indic for the second trial .
and doe not depend upon the first trial is a system of pair , a , j , b , k , where aj , now , the result of the first trial is complet unfett .
wherea the result , bk , the result of the second trial , is on of an identifi subset of possibl which ar identifi let's sai by gothic t .
in a veri natur sens a depend on trial on , b depend on trial two , we would anticip that thei ar independ .
now what doe independ for pair of event mean , and we have a rule of product for intersect probabl .
and therefor we need to construct a third event , the event a intersect b .
i'm go to call thi a rectangular event becaus of a graphic reason i'll come to shortli .
what , what doe a intersect b mean ?
a intersect b is now subset of order pair , a sub j for the first trial , b sub k for the second trial .
where a sub j is the pair group of the first trial and b sub k is the pair group of the second trial .
in other word , now the first and second trial ar both not unfett .
a sub j ha to be on of an identifi sub group , b sub k ha to be on of an identifi sub group .
we'll call such intersect rectangular for simpl graphic reason .
if you imagin that the subset of indic blackboard j repres let's sai the interv shown in the upper right of the screen and the subset of indic , blackboard k , repres a anoth interv on your screen .
then if you allow the first index to be in blackboard j , the second index should be unaffect , you get a strip .
if you allow the , the second index to onli in blackboard k , the first index to be unfett , you get anoth thi time horizont strip .
the intersect of those two give you indic where the first element is in blackboard j and the second element is in blackboard k , in other word , you get visual a rectangl .
okai now we abstract thi principl and call such set in gener , gener rectangular set .
okai ?
all thi mean is that the first element vari freeli over some set .
the second element vari freeli over some of the set and the result is what we call a rectangular set .
of cours , what matter now is what ar the chanc of all of these event , and doe a rule of product emerg .
let's paus and take a look at thi now .
first , we start with the individu chanc experi and we're alloc mass function to each of them .
p sub j for the first , q sub k for the second .
natur enough , the mass function have to be non neg and thei have to be properli normal .
all possibl for the first trial have to add to on .
all possibl for the second trial have to add to on .
so the pj's add to on , and the qk's add to on .
excel , thi is set the stage we're now look at the compound experi .
now , in the compon experi , we're look at order pair and a mass function alloc probabl pj , qk to the atom consist of the order pair aj bk .
our first question should be , well thi is a by fiat of definit , which is write down what we sai , what we claim is go to give us a probabl measur .
doe it in fact give us a probabl measur ?
now , if you multipli two non neg number you're go to get a non neg number so posit's trite .
the atom measur is go to give you a non neg number .
the question is , is it properli normal ?
and of cours thi should be check , right ?
thi is a saniti check to make sure the foundat is solid .
so , we want to add up over all possibl , the atom probabl which ar of the form pjqk .
but it is sum over all j and all k , we can simpli separ the sub into a sum over j of pj time the sum over k of qk .
each of the term in the round bracket is on becaus the individu mass function with a digit trial ask you to be anom .
so we get on time on , or in fact , on .
thi atom measur is , in fact , suitabl normalis .
it give rise to bona fide probabl measur .
now , let's turn to the event .
what can i sai about a chang of the event a .
natur enough by we sum over all possibl for the atom in a .
what ar the atom in a ?
well thei ar pair , aj , bk , where j arrang where an identifi subset of integ indic , blackboard j .
k is authent .
can rang over all indic .
ak in the sum , factor into a product of two sum .
you're first in the wrong bracket is a sum over a restrict rang for the index j or the item defin locat for the first trial over blackboard j .
some of our indic in blackboard j off the probabl b sub j .
the second term in wrong bracket just sum overal possibl for q .
but the q case ar probabl normal thei add to on the second term vanish quietli .
like leav you simpli just a sum over a restrict rang of interced blackboard j of the probabl b j .
likewis , an entir analog argument get us the probabl of the b .
to get thi probabl we have to sum over all atom probabl for the atom in b .
the atom in b ar pair aj , bk where j is unfett , but k now is in a restrict group , a blackboard k divid ahead of time .
the first sub knowledg on , becaus the pj's ar properli normal , and so we now get an express for the probabl of b , as a sum over blackboard k , of the probabl qk .
right . and now the million dollar question .
what can you you sai about the probabl of the intersect of a with b ?
again , the sum of all possibl , but now we're look at order pair where the index j ha to lie in the id defi subset black board j .
the index k ha to lie the id defi subset black board k .
we separ the sum again to a pro , into a product of two term .
the first term in round bracket is exactli what we ad to find as a probabl in a .
the second term in round bracket is exactli what we ad to find as a probabl of the event b and therefor inevit , the probabl of a intersect b is exactli the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
and rule of product ha magic emerg from thi notat mess .
of cours you realiz that thi argument is impecc howev i choos the identifi set of indic j , howev i choos the particular subset .
of gothic a that trigger the first event and howev i chose the second subset of indic , gothic , blackboard k which give us a subset of gothic b and therefor we've discov that .
ani event a and b so construct , where a is determin by the first trial in the sens that i've outlin here , and b is determin by the second trial , again in thi sens , ani two such event ar forc to be independ , provid the probabl measur is obtain .
by multipli independ probabl , the probabl measur is a product measur obtain by multipli probabl from independ trial .
here is a wonder gener principl .
notic , the moment i can make thi claim , the moment i can identifi event like thi .
the necess for check independ goe awai .
the moment event can be so broken up we automat get independ .
thi is what i mean by the necess for check independ is not there anymor .
independ is now transpar in such a set .
our next step now , of cours , is to take what we've done for two trial , and quickli expand it into mani , mani trial and thi is what come up next .
we help manag to put our finger on the kei idea of independ when we have independ trial .
event which depend upon separ trial ar independ , provid the trial ar independ , in the sens that the conjoin probabl measur is obtain via a product .
in other word , we have a product measur .
thi is at the heart of thi particular understand of independ .
the reason why coin toss success ar independ .
the mathemat reason why success toss of a dice ar consid independ , not in ordinari languag , but in a formal and deep mathemat sens .
we should promptli codifi all of thi in a gener set , of cours , our notat will inescap get more cumbrou , but the result ar well worth the effort .
we ar go to be abl to get , in a particular set , independ essenti for free , and thi turn out to be a kei and subtl idea .
so let us do thi without further ado .
so , we ar go to look at a gener where we have a success of trial , and let's start by look at a finit number of trial .
how mani ?
let us sai a chanc experi , where there ar n individu chanc base trial .
the trial need not be the result of a particular devic .
in fact , we could us differ object for differ trial .
for exampl , a dice onc , a coin next , card third .
we would like to have a mechan which allow us to be flexibl .
and accordingli , we think of the result of each of these trial and identifi them by gothic letter a and identifi the trial number via a subscript .
so gothic a subscript on tell us the possibl result of trial on .
gothic a2 , trial two .
gothic a n , the result of trial n .
in full gener , identifi the possibl result of trial on .
first , identifi the trial number as a subscript on , follow by the particular result , sai , the k x result and identifi as an element , a on k .
so , a on k , as k rang over variou synthesi repres the collect of possibl result of trial on , we call thi gothic a on .
similarli gothic a two and gothic a n .
compris of element a , sub n , trial number k , identifi which outcom give you the collect of result with trial n .
each of these trial is chanc driven .
it's a discret set , and therefor , we ascrib an atom measur to the singleton , a1k .
the atom in the first trial of obtain the kth element .
we alloc a probabl , a chanc p subscript on for the trial .
and now , we move the identifi of which outcom to the argument k .
so p1k is a mass in trial on alloc to the atom a on k .
k now result of on or all possibl .
of cours , the p on ks have to be non neg .
and as a sum over k , p on k ha to add to on .
do the same thing for a two , a three , a n .
for trial n , the space of possibl outcom is gothic a n .
the mass function we alloc to each possibl outcom , each atom , a , trial n , outcom k is the probabl p , subscript n for the trial , argument k identifi which outcom we ar look at .
we now have a system of independ trial .
each trial ha got an alphabet of possibl and a mass function attach to it .
these mass function individu have to be non neg , thei have to add to on .
non neg , add to on .
non neg , add to on .
we now stitch the compound experi togeth by look all these trial on mass .
the compound experi is specifi by specifi the result of each trial , natur enough .
we identifi the result of each trial as an order interv .
the first element of the a1 , k1 .
repres the k1 at element of trial on .
the second element , a2 , k2 , repres the k2 at the element of trial two , the last element , an , k sub n repres the k sub n in that element of trial a .
the notat is inescap more compress .
but we have mani ball in the air , and we need notat which keep track of which is which , all right ?
we alreadi defin a particular element of trial on , k1 , a particular element of trial , two k two , a particular element of trial , n , k n .
and togeth , thi form an order n tupl , which tell you what a sampl point of a conjoin experi is .
as k1 rang a row of possibl , k2 rang a row of possibl , kn rang a row of possibl .
you allow your sampl point your n toppl to rang over all possibl in the space of entranc .
thi then is a conjoin sampl space .
thi is obtain as a cartesian product of k1 , with k2 , with kn .
the sampl space now is a product space .
and natur , we now need a , measur .
and the measur we attach , and thi where the independ trial come in .
is to each atom , each will attach a mass , a probabl , which is a product of the individu mass .
so the probabl attach to the n tupl a1 k1 , a2 k2 , an kn is a product of p1 k1 , p2 k2 , pn kn .
the verif that thi is a bona fide probabl measur is trite .
it's clearli a product of posit number .
it's posit .
it add to on becaus the sum of all k on k two through k n separ it into a product of sum over k on k two through k n , just as we had for the case of two trial .
and therefor , each of those sum is on , and the product of on is on , and therefor it's properli normal .
thi give us the set of the air compound experi where you have a product space , and now a product measur , which is given to us via the independ trial .
we now need event which ar determin in term of each trial .
so , let us pick the trial for definit .
the trial ha result which ar captur in the alphabet gothic a , sub j .
each of those result ha an atom mass captur in the valu b sub j of k .
k run all possibl .
identifi in the space of possibl for gothic a j , k sub j , which repres element of the kth of the jth trial , which can trigger your limit .
identifi the event a j with the occurr of those possibl in the jth trial .
formal then , a sub j clearli ha an event .
it ha to be a subset of a sampl space .
therefor , it's a collect of n tupl .
but thi collect of n tupl ha a jth member , an element which is from a defin set of possibl .
it's in a restrict rang of possibl , hard element for the jth tiral .
and the remain element ar complet unfett .
again , border strongli from the infus we have .
for the case of two trial , we will sai a subject is determin by the jth trial .
all you've done is specifi a set of indic , k sub j , for the jth trial .
and the outcom of ani of those outcom trigger event aj .
the remain trial ar irrelev , as far as aj is concern .
do thi for j run from <num> through n .
we now have a collect of n independ event .
a1 , determin by the first trial .
a2 by the second trial , and so on .
a n determin by the nth trial .
ani event so construct , where each of the basic constitu event is determin by on underli trial alon , separ from the other .
ani such collect of independ is , without the necess of ani calcul , independ .
why ?
for the same reason we saw for the case of two trial .
the probabl separ and multipli .
there you go .
in thi simplest case , thi is a set .
that is so familiar to us and intuit for us .
a special of thi give us coin toss , throw of a dice , and so on .
and thi is perhap the singl most import sub case of the gener edific , right ?
and it's worth focus on .
thi is the case of a repeat independ trial .
in other word , i'm flip the same , same coin , again , and again , and again .
the coin ha the same alphabet , let's sai gothic a for everi trial .
and we're throw the same dice , again , and again , and again .
the die ha the same alphabet , gothic a , for each trial .
in other word .
all the alphabet .
gothic a1 through gothic a and , ar all the same .
thei're some alphabet gothic a .
we can now dispens with the subscript becaus you just have on common alphabet .
let's just call the possibl outcom of a trial littl a sub k .
and k run over a finit , or possibl a countabl infinit rang .
okai .
now , the trial ar repeat and independ .
thei ar repeat with the sens that the chanc condit don't chang .
or therefor , for each possibl outcom in a trial , we alloc a mass .
and that mass for sai , the k , the outcom ak is , let's sai , a valu p of k .
the p of k's have to be non neg .
have to add to on .
posit and normal .
we now have a chanc experi trial by trial .
the statist condit for the trial have remain the same .
but of cours , the trial ar independ , in the sens , that when you stretch togeth a conjoin experi , now omega is a cartesian product of gothic a with gothic a , n time .
and natur enough , we'll write a product with it's self n time , as a power , gothic a to the power n .
it just repres a cross a , cross a , cross a , n time .
what is thi ?
it's a collect of element of n element and n tupl from our alphabet .
sampl is with replac .
oh , thi is beauti .
so ak on , ak two , ak three , ak n .
the result of what happen in each of the trial when you ar draw from the same alphabet , again and again and again .
sampl with replac .
the product space is now simpl , it's clean .
the system of n tupl we saw thi repeatedli , for exampl , in three toss of a coin .
the product space wa a system of three head or three tail , or a tripl of head and tail .
each element of tripl is drawn from the same alphabet , h and t .
the locat of the element in the interv tell you which trial we're deal with .
and that's it .
veri clean and simpl notat .
what doe a probabl measur we attach here ?
well , the mass function attach to ani n tupl is simpli a product of the individu mass of the element of the n tupl .
so in other word , if you're look at the end tubal , k1 , k2 , through kn , the probabl of ak1 akn is p of k1 , the mass attach to a k1 , time p of k2 , the mass attach to a k2 , and so on , time p of kn , the mass attach to a kn .
veri , veri clean and simpl structur .
in thi set , ani event a1 , depend onli on the first outcom .
ani event a2 , depend onli on the second outcom .
ani event an depend onli on the na outcom .
these constitut a famili of independ event .
thi is now a special , but it's a us and practic import special of a gentl set .
a gener in a differ direct will consid not just a finit number of independ trial , but possibl uncount infinit number of independ trial .
we've seen exampl of thi type befor .
imagin for instanc , the repeat indefinit toss of a coin .
of cours , thi is a gedanken experi , a thought experi .
on couldn't possibl toss a coin indefinit an infinit number of time .
but on could imagin thi .
thi now result in a set where the compound experi is a veri rich product space .
a space of entir infinit sequenc of trial .
all that we've done here will more or less go through the on place where we get a technic complic is , and how doe on specifi a probabl measur ?
we can't simpli multipli probabl becaus if you multipli an infinit number of them , you get zero .
we saw that thi technic complic wa handl by more space .
we won't take the time to make that particular detour now , but we will abstract out the kei element of what we've discov now , for both finit and countabl infinit space .
and we've captur in a slogan .
in the case of a finit or even countabl infinit number of repeat independ trial , the compound experi or the product space , to which is attach a product measur by appli individu atom properti in such set , event determin by distinct trial ar independ .
what thi mean is that in such set , that formid list of condit requir for independ .
probabl , all three wai probabl , all quadrupl prob , all of those condit ar immedi and trite satisfi .
thi turn out to be wonderfulli rich and subtl .
and when you work on thi next by look at first a coupl of exampl from set which ar much more rich and interest than the more banal tri simpl exampl , we look at in literatur .
well , take on , for exampl , from thi fear of gambl .
and we'll pick on from genet .
and with those under our belt , we'll now have come to a proper and right understand of what thi subtl and deep and central idea of independ is .
with an idea of independ under our belt , we will now be properli situat to ask what happen when independ is lost .
first by small amount , then by larg amount .
in understand of independ , confer upon us eventu a deeper and richer understand of set where we do not have independ , so we show .
go on next to two rich exampl of thi particular framework we have put togeth .
let us conclud by bring into perspect and focu , what we have seen so far .
at it heart , independ is a veri simpl elementari and intuit concept .
independ captur the idea that independ possibl , commonli interpret , will multipli .
independ is a product rule at heart .
where matter get complex , is when we have a larg number of put independ event .
in such set , to check independ requir a formal check of a veri larg number of product possibl .
thi look forbid .
but again , common experi and intuit show us the wai .
the simplest set where independ aris in larg complex experi is when on ha , as in a compound experi , compris of repeat independ trial .
so , in particular , in a notat we've seen , suppos gothic a1 repres a first trial whose outcom ar a finit , or a countabl number of possibl .
gothic a2 repres a second trial whose outcom ar possibl differ , and again a finit or a countabl number of possibl , and so forth .
when we think of the compound experi compris of all these trial put togeth , on after anoth , then the sampl point ar , let's sai in two pool of possibl , and we call thi compound experi the product space .
the element ar obtain by cartesian product of the individu trial .
the natur probabl measur in such a set is the product measur , where we take the individu atom measur for each of the trial and simpli multipli them out .
as we've seen , thi immedi , without the necess for further check , give us independ on a larg scale .
as a slogan , event determin by non overlap group of independ trial ar also independ .
and , no further check ar necessari .
thi conclud part two of tableau <num> .
when we return , we shall move on to look at how independ aris in subtl and deep wai in a varieti of problem of practic import .
so , in the next tableau , we'll talk about game of chanc , and in particular gambl .
we'll talk about genet .
and , we'll talk about sociolog , and a return to basketbal , and a hot hand .
what have we learn from our simpl exampl ?
that , a multipl tabl is at the heart of the simpl decomposit of probabl .
in other word , there appear to be in certain set a natur rule of product .
let us promptli gener and abstract thi into a definit .
we will sai , as a matter of definit , that two event , a and b , in a probabl space ar independ .
if the probabl of a intersect b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
you should bear in mind that in definit , the definit ar alwai two wai , right ?
but we'll usual dispens with the and , onli , if portion of the definit , it is impli .
it's part of a definit .
here is now a mathemat definit of independ .
we should keep in mind that thi , in principl , abstract out what we commonli understand by independ in ordinari languag .
but it sai more .
it sai thing veri precis , veri concret .
whenev we talk about independ , probabilist independ , though we usual drop the word probabilist in our set .
independ is alwai in a mathemat or probabilist context .
when we sai independ , we mean precis the object on your screen .
noth more , noth less .
intuit or feel for independ in ordinari languag can all affect , help understand the problem .
but ultim , when push come to shove , that mathemat relat is what we mean and we understand by independ .
of cours , thi relat did not come out of a vacuum .
it aros out of simpl combinatori set .
out of simpl multipl tabl of possibl .
and we understand that in variou set , thi kind of relat emerg .
what we now do , in such a definit , is take that observ and expand it wide , greatli , vastli to a gener abstract set , where intuit mai be albeit .
we'll see exampl shortli , but for the time be , let's go ahead and sai we have a veri simpl definit .
we hard wire thi into our brain .
thi is what we mean by independ .
let us explor what it consequ ar .
to begin , that definit look vagu familiar .
why ?
well , it talk about the probabl of an intersect .
where have i seen that befor ?
and a littl thought sai oh , well we've seen that in our definit of condit probabl , here is a chain rule .
we can write the probabl of the intersect of two event .
in term of a chain involv a condit probabl of on event with the respect to the other .
now , thi is gener true , as long as , of cours , the event to be ha got posit probabl and the object on the right ar defin .
but now , we have anoth relationship for an intersect probabl .
but thi requir more structur in the event .
what if the event , a and b , ar independ ?
well , that sai the intersect probabl is given by a product of probabl .
now , by examin the right hand side , we can immedi deduc a relationship of condit probabl .
but befor we do that , let's paus to observ that our chain rule of condit probabl can be written in the other direct just as well , by condit on the event a .
and now , examin the object on the right hand side , we can simpli deduc that if a and b ar independ event of posit probabl , .
then the condit probabl of a given b is just the probabl of a itself .
and the condit probabl of b given a is just the probabl of b itself .
in other word , we ar in a polit ag and so we should want a slogan , so here's our slogan .
mathemat independ , probabilist independ , captur a veri intuit idea .
that if two event , a and b , ar independ , then the occurr of on doe not affect the chanc of the other .
thi is veri promis .
thi is exactli what we'd hope that a definit of independ would try to captur .
but of cours , now we have a formal mathemat structur which captur thi .
so again , independ mean that a joint probabl is a product of probabl .
independ is a rule of product .
befor we move on to applic of more heft .
we should examin the definit a littl bit more and see if certain other attribut emerg .
so let's start with a veri simpl question .
i've given you two event , a and b .
the moment i give you the event a and b , other event ar implicitli part of the structur , for exampl , the complement of these event .
if i tell you that a and b ar independ , well , that mean you have the rule of product .
doe it sai anyth about a and b complement ?
now , instinct , i want to sai , that if a and b ar independ , then a and b complement ar independ , natur .
but of cours , thi instinct , base upon our experi .
the question is , doe our formal mathemat definit captur that intuit ?
and for thi , we can't just appeal to intuit , we have to go back to first principl .
what is a structur we look at ?
doe a rule of product emerg from that structur ?
if it doe , then we can conclud independ .
if it doe not , then sadli , we will not be abl to .
so , let's go back and write down what we need .
we want to ask someth about the probabl of the intersect of these two new event , a and b complement .
and i've given you an ident .
do you recogn where it come from ?
natur , thei're us addit .
think of an event a .
the event b and b complement partit space , and therefor the chanc of a can be decompos into the chanc of a , which is a part of b .
and the chanc of that portion of a which is a part of b complement .
thi is addit .
move on of the probabl to the right , and you've got the addit in front of you .
thi is veri nice , becaus on the right , we have a term which repres a probabl of a conjunct of an intersect .
but if we know event a and b , we know that that can be decompos as a product .
thi is what independ give us .
oh , thi is love .
the moment that happen , i've got on the right , variou term .
and natur , i factor out common factor , in thi case , the probabl of a .
and then in round bracket in the right , i get on minu the probabl of b .
that's familiar .
i recogn that via addit again , as the probabl of b complement .
howev , b and b compliment togeth , instead of the whole space .
normal tell you that the entir space ha got probabl on , and therefor we're caught by addit , an ident .
on the left , the probabl of the conjunct of a and b complement .
on the right , the product of the correspond probabl .
by the definit of independ , we conclud that a and b complement ar inde independ .
but then what about other combin ?
what about a complement and b complement ?
what about a complement and b ?
let's paus befor we do ani more analysi , okai ?
what ha our analysi told us ?
if you start out two event , a and b , then , and thei're independ .
if you complement ani on of them , then the two ar again independ .
so if you complement b , then a and b complement independ .
of cours , we can run exactli the same analysi if you complement a , which mean a complement b ar independ .
but if a and b complement ar independ , then if you complement on of them , it didn't get independ .
so if you complement a , then a complement and b complement ar independ .
what we just discov is that on ident , that on rule of product on your upper left .
right .
that impli all the other rule of product for variou con , complement conjunct .
and therefor , ani on of these independ relat impli the truth of all the other .
oh , thi is veri nice .
elementari , i know .
but still , veri nice .
thi give us confid that the mathemat structur is inde captur the physic kind of realiti that i vagu refer to as independ .
here's the mathemat structur .
now , we want to build upon thi and see what it sai in applic where independ is not nearli quit so clear .
that is our next step .
we have now come to a right understand of the idea of independ in probabl .
it is now time to test our understand on exampl which will stretch our capabl a littl bit .
so let's begin immedi with a question of rank .
so imagin that we have four protagonist let call them p , q , r , and s , think of them as athlet or student , let's sai the athlet want to race .
we ar go to rank the athlet , in order , from the fastest to the slowest or if you ar student from the highest rank to the lowest rank .
imagin of cours that in thi set , all possibl arrang of rank ar equal like .
what is a natur probabl space for thi model ?
so let's begin it on step at a time .
we'll natur want a sampl space .
the sampl space here is the alloc of order to the four athlet p , q , r and s .
in other word we've got a <num> tupl of individu and everi possibl permut of thi <num> tupl is a valid sampl point .
how mani possibl permut ar there ?
well , there ar four factori per , permut , or <num> possibl permut .
now , for the sampl space is all <num> permut of the letter p , q , r , and s .
let's put in place some event of interest for us .
so , let's start with an event a , which connot the possibl that athlet p rank ahead of athlet q , p wa ahead of q .
of cours , thi is in ordinari languag .
but it , it is an event and therefor it is a subset of the sampl space we have identifi .
which subset is it ?
well , i won't write down all the possibl for you but now it should be easi enough to imagin .
i want to look at all string of four letter where p appear befor q .
here's anoth event , call it b .
that r lead s .
likewis , all <num> tupl where r appear befor s .
in principl , we could enumer it .
but it is suffici now to understand what the structur of thi event is .
the probabl measur , natur , is combinatori .
all possibl ar assum to be equal like .
so we ar deal with an atom measur , which put equal mass , <num> over <num> on each atom , on each permut .
let's comput probabl , 'kai ?
our basic question is , ar a and b independ ?
now , to do thi , we have to understand the probabl of a .
we have to understand the probabl of b .
and we have to understand the probabl of a intersect b .
and then we queri , is a rule of product satisfi ?
thi is the acid test for independ .
let's go step by step .
what can we sai about the probabl of a ?
now if p is to be ahead of q , we can decompos it in the follow wai , p could be the first .
if that's the case that p will certainli be ahead of q and q will have three possibl .
or p could be second but in that case for p to lead q , q must be in on of the two possibl follow p .
or p could be the third place and if that's the case q must be the last place if she is to follow p .
and therefor there ar <num> plu <num> plu <num> possibl for put q to the right of p .
have put p and q in place there ar two slot left , and r and s will have to occupi those two slot .
how can you arrang r and s in there , well then two factori ar two wai .
and therefor there's a total of <num> plu <num> plu <num> , where's a rang in p and q with q follow p , two wai of arrang r and s in ani order you like , and total , you get <num> time <num> , or <num> possibl for p lead q .
<num> outcom which ar favor for the event a , that p lead q .
how mani possibl in total ?
well , the total number of outcom is <num> of four factori , and therefor the probabl that p lead q , the probabl of event a is <num> in <num> .
of cours , vari a chang in name , an exactli similar calcul hold for the probabl that r lead s , for the probabl the event b .
therefor both the probabl of the event a and b have a chanc <num> in <num> .
what i can i sai about the intersect ?
well , the intersect of a and b mean , p lead q and r lead s .
well , let's start by put q to the right of p .
how mani wai ar there of do that ?
as we'd notic , <num> plu <num> plu <num> wai .
now p and q ar alloc with q follow p .
there ar <num> stroke left .
but if r is to lead s thei can pair now with r take the lead slot and s take the last slot .
therefor onc you place p and q , r and s ar also place .
and therefor thei ar <num> plu <num> plu <num> outcom favor to the joint occurr of the event a and b .
again , out of <num> possibl outcom , and the first chanc of a intersect b is <num> in <num> .
now , to test independ , we find that <num> in <num> is just <num> in <num> time <num> in <num> .
and therefor , the probabl of a intersect b is given by a product of the probabl of a and b .
and we conclud by fiat of definit that the event a and b ar independ .
did that surpris you ?
our introspect look back at the problem , perhap you can convinc yourself of cours thei're independ becaus the placement , the rate of placement of p and q doesn't depend upon the rel placement of r and s in term of the chanc , that seem veri reason , veri intuit , and it is correct .
let's look at a slightli more complex exampl , thi time deal with famili .
so here is an experi .
imagin that a famili is known to have three children .
begin by make the appropri assumpt for the probabl space .
paus for a minut and see if you can construct the sampl space .
let begin .
the sampl space , well , if there ar three children , thei ar each categor by their gender , boi or girl .
so the sampl space can be enumer by list all possibl sequenc of boi and girl .
a littl b for boi , a g for girl .
let's just sai in order of ag , oldest first , youngest last .
and therefor , the sampl space consist tripl , bbb , three boi .
or bbg , the youngest is a girl .
or bgb , the middl child is a girl , the other ar boi , and so on .
but ggg mean all three children ar girl , and there ar exactli eight possibl .
let's put togeth some event here , all right .
so these connot noth of particular interest , except thei're , thei're , thei're craft togeth to make a point .
so let a be the event that the famili ha at most on girl .
what is thi event ?
what subset of sampl point is refer to by thi event ?
well , if at most on girl , then you can have at most on g appear in the string of three letter .
and therefor , you have four possibl .
no girl , and exactli on girl , in variou locat , oldest , middl , or youngest .
let's look at anoth event .
let b be the event .
the famili ha children of both sex .
thi mean that the bookend sampl point , three boi , three girl ar eschew , ar elimin .
and what remain leav you six sampl point , where all those tripl contain at least on b and on g .
it's easier in thi set to actual look at the complement of these event .
what doe b complement ?
that the famili contain children of onli on gender .
and there ar two possibl there , all boi or all girl .
excel .
now , let's put togeth a probabl measur .
the natur probabl measur is , in a combinatori set .
it is uniform across the possibl .
and therefor , we look at an atom measur , which put mass <num> over <num> on each atom .
each tripl of gender ha got probabl <num> in <num> .
and here is now our question , ar the event , a and b , independ ?
paus and think about thi .
don't start the analysi yet , but stare at the event .
see if you can get some feel for them .
doe your gut tell you on wai or the other ?
you , do you think thei're independ ?
do you think perhap thei ar not independ ?
paus and think about it for a minut befor look at the analysi to follow .
now , let then take a look at thi .
let's begin by write down the probabl of a .
now , it clear , a ha got four sampl point and therefor the chanc of a is <num> of <num> or <num> in <num> , okai ?
but it's go to be us to decompos thi us addit as follow .
we can partit a into two event .
an event where there ar no girl .
well , thi is an atom , a singl thing consist of just a tripl bbb .
in the event that there is precis on girl .
thi give you an event with three element in it , where the girl is either the oldest , or the middl , or the youngest .
and addit tell us the possibl ar go to add .
there's on for the first possibl , three for the next .
and therefor , there's a on in , on plu three or four possibl , which trigger the event a .
okai .
we find that a ha got a chanc exactli on and two .
okai , so far , so good .
what about the event b ?
well , it is easier to look at a complement of b where the children ar all of on gender .
there ar two possibl for the children of be of on gender , all boi or all girl .
out of eight , therefor , there's a <num> in <num> chanc that the complement of the probabl occur .
and therefor , by addit , the chanc of b occur is <num> minu <num> in <num> , or <num> in <num> .
well , for independ , i'm go to need to check the joint probabl of a and b .
what can i sai about the probabl of the intersect of a with b ?
what doe a intersect b mean ?
well , it mean that the famili ha at most , on girl .
and that the famili ha children of both sex .
but thi mean that the famili ha precis on girl .
and that girl could either be the oldest , the middl , or the youngest .
the event a intersect b consist of a tripl gbb , bgb and bbg .
it's got three possibl .
the probabl of thi event therefor is natur <num> in <num> .
but here is nub .
<num> in <num> is decompos as <num> in <num> time <num> in <num> .
which is the same as the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
and perhap a littl more unexpec , unexpectedli now , a rule of product ha emerg from the rubbl .
and we conclud by definit that the event a and b ar inde independ .
did thi fit with your intuit idea for the problem ?
if it did , then you had good intuit .
if it didn't , then thi is go to help you refin the intuit .
now , have done thi work , admittedli not too much work , natur now if we want to see if we can expand on thi and appli it more gener .
how can we gener thi problem ?
well , natur enough , we can replac three children by , let us sai , n children .
why n ?
well , it is inevit that i call the algebra variabl anyth els , isn't it ?
so suppos a famili have n children .
and defin the event a and b just as , as , as given here .
where a is the event that the famili ha at most on girl and b , the event that the famili's children ar both sex .
ar a and b independ ?
well , natur , from thi exampl , i would be tempt to sai hm , yeah , sure , of cours .
it's it make clear that thei ar independ , though the structur look a littl more complex now .
but we should be a littl cautiou , yeah .
so let's go ahead and run an analysi through on more time .
thi time , for a famili with n children .
so a famili's known to have n children .
the sampl space now , is a system of n tupl of gender .
where each element is a boi or a girl , b or g .
how mani n tupl ar there ?
well , if there ar just two children , there ar four possibl , bb , bg , gb , gg .
when there ar three children , as we saw , there ar eight possibl .
four children give you <num> possibl .
and in gener with n children , there ar two to the power of n possibl for the distribut of gender across those n children .
the event a and b ar as advertis , but the combin , combinatori measur now we have assign equal mass to each sampl point to each atom .
and therefor , the probabl of each atom is <num> in <num> to the power n .
a question again , is our a and b independ ?
and let's run through the calcul again .
first , what can i sai about the probabl of a ?
again , it is natur to decompos a , partit it into two piec .
an event , a singleton , consist of all boi and no girl .
and an event consist of precis on girl .
now , if it's precis on girl , that girl by ag , could be in ani on of n locat .
and therefor , the probabl of the second event is go to be n over <num> to the n .
additv give it , bring home everyth els .
so the probabl of a is <num> plu a over <num> to the n .
all right , what about b ?
well , again , let's start with b complement , becaus that's simpl .
in thi set again , b complement mean thei ar children of onli on gender .
which mean all boi or all girl , and there ar no other possibl .
and therefor , the probabl of b complement is simpli <num> and <num> to the power n .
cancel out the <num> in numer and denomin .
it's <num> and <num> to the power n minu <num> .
what about the probabl of b ?
well , addit arriv to the rescu .
it's <num> minu the reciproc of <num> to the power n minu <num> .
excel .
we now still need to sai someth about the probabl of the intersect .
what is a intersect b mean ?
it mean that the famili ha at most on girl , and children of both sex .
in word , it mean the famili ha exactli on girl .
but that on girl , as we've seen , can be ani on of n ag locat .
and therefor the probabl of a intersect b is n over <num> to the power n .
notic how onc you've understood a small version of a problem , frequent the mode of thought inform gener abstract .
at thi point we've got all the data we need .
our question is , ar a and b independ ?
now , if thei ar to be independ , then we need a rule of product .
so we have to check our rule of product .
is the probabl of a intersect b equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b ?
the first step right it will properti wave to section , the properti of a time the equalit of b on the left and we're ask is thi ident true ?
let's simplifi it , okai ?
at thi point we're just , we've exhaust all the probabilist , chanc driven connot , it's all just pure algebra .
cancel out the factor of <num> to the power of n in the nu , in the denomin on both side .
take the <num> plu n and multipli out insid the round bracket .
and we ask , is n equal to <num> plu n minu <num> plu n over <num> to the power of n minu <num> ?
a littl more massag , cancel n on both side , move the n over <num> to the power of n minu <num> to the left .
and you ask , is n over <num> to the power n minu <num> equal to <num> ?
and therefor , thi is equal to ask the follow question .
is it true that <num> to the power of n minu <num> is equal to <num> plu n ?
and we immedi see that we have a problem .
on the left , we have someth which is grow exponenti fast with n .
on the right , we have someth which is trudg along veri pedestrian , linearli with n .
clearli , thi cannot hold all the time , and in fact it doesn't .
here is a tabl give you exampl of small valu of n to see what happen to <num> plu n and <num> to the n minu <num> .
<num> plu n rule linearli , as n run from <num> through <num> , <num> plu n run from <num> to <num> .
but <num> to the n minu <num> run two , four , eight , sixteen , thirti two .
it's blow up veri fast .
when you look at thi tabl , you find there's exactli on row where the second and third column ar the same .
and that is when n is equal to <num> .
we conclud that a and b ar independ if and onli if the famili ha three children .
thi might be a littl surpris at first blush .
among other thing , thi point out the danger of jump to gener conclus base on limit empir evid , right ?
the case , n equal to <num> , wa special .
oh , ye , i did thi intention .
i do not apolog , right ?
i gave you on special case , and of cours we were tempt to believ that , that wa typic , but it wa not .
it wa atyp .
in fact , that is the onli case where independ erupt .
all other valu for n result in non independ , independ event .
we could dig a littl more into thi and sai , well , do i realli feel , understand , do i believ thi ?
well , take a look at what happen , for exampl , if n is larg , right ?
think of your favorit larg number .
now , if n is larg and you're told , for exampl , that the famili ha at most on girl .
suppos you're given that inform .
in other word , you're given that a occur .
now , if a occur , there's on possibl in a which correspond to no girl .
and n possibl where n is big , for exactli on girl .
if a occur , the overwhelm possibl is that on of the imposs with on girl is what realli happen as the outcom .
and therefor , the chanc of b given a is actual veri high .
oh , after the fact , of cours , it becom clear , it becom transpar .
we understand why these event influenc potenti each other .
but thi kind of analysi doesn't expos the fact that with n equal to <num> , thei actual don't in , influenc each other's chanc .
that need calcul .
and thi is why the abstract and the definit ar us and import .
so , the moral so far , the idea so far , is that independ is govern by a multipl tabl .
independ is , at heart , a rule of product .
if you want to check independ , you need to verifi that a product ident hold true .
our next step is to take a look at the definit itself and look at a variat on that theme .
to expos flavor that were not immedi appar at first blush .
let us now take a look at our definit nu and extract a differ flavor , a differ color from the definit .
it's a variat on that theme , thi time take into account condit inform .
recal that the idea of condit effect reduc a sampl space to the space govern by the event describ in the asid inform .
no new concept ar need to describ independ with regard to thi new , foreshorten , smaller sampl space .
so without ani further ado , here is now a definit of condit independ .
so we'll sai that two event a and b in some probabl space ar condition independ given an event c of some posit probabl if inde a rule of product emerg for condit probabl .
the probabl of a intersect b given that c ha occur is equal to the probabl of a given c time the probabl of b given c .
again , let me reemphas that no new ground ha been cover here .
thi is exactli the same old idea of independ as a rule of product .
in a condit set , we're take into account a fact that condit on the occurr of some site inform c , some event c , effect ha reduc the sampl space to c .
and then all event probabl ar now reflect into c .
independ in that context , again , is just a rule of product .
now , let me immedi give you an exampl of a common set where thi kind of condit independ aris natur .
again , we go back to coin .
so , the set is as follow .
imagin that now we have two coin , a coin , sai coin on , realli creativ call , whose success probabl , the probabl of a head , is on in six .
and a second coin , creativ coin two , whose success probabl , the probabl of a head , is five in six .
the first coin is weight awai from head .
the second coin is weight toward head in these proport .
we select on of these two coin at random .
we're equal like to select on coin or the other .
have got the coin , we pick it , put awai the other coin , and toss the chosen coin twice .
okai , what is the probabl space that is appropri for thi problem ?
as alwai , we'll begin with the sampl space .
the sampl space , recal , to identifi what it , thi is , we're go to have to track down all sourc of uncertainti in the experi .
let's do thi systemat .
first , there is an uncertain select of a coin .
there's a coin choos mechan .
good .
have specifi a coin , there ar two toss .
so natur enough , if i specifi a tripl , the select of the coin , the result of the first toss , the result of the second toss , i'll have complet elimin all uncertainti in what happen in thi experi .
the sampl space , therefor , is a space of tripl specifi by a coin select , coin on or coin two , follow by the result of two toss , head or tail , head or tail .
excel .
let's put some event of interest togeth .
so , let's start with some veri banal and simpl event .
sai a is the event that the first toss of the chosen coin result in a head .
let b be the event that the second toss of the chosen coin also result in a head .
now , we want to sai someth about a and b , right ?
but the structur of the problem make clear that an ancillari event might be us .
and which ancillari event ?
natur , the specif of the coin .
let c be the event that the coin chosen is the first coin , coin on .
of cours , the complement of c is the event that the coin chosen is the second coin .
now , what is an appropri probabl measur for thi problem ?
now , i'm go to posit for you that there is inde a natur probabl measur .
and that measur sai that condit on the choic of the coin , if i chose the first coin , then the chanc of get a head on that toss of that coin is on in six .
and thi chanc is unaffect by the number of toss .
mathemat , we want to put all thi verbat to a succinct encapsul .
and what we're realli sai is the probabl of a given c , the probabl of a head given that coin on is chosen , is on in six .
and thi the same as the probabl of a head given that coin on is chosen on the second toss of the coin .
so far , so good .
how do you put the two toss togeth ?
now , the moment we think about flip a specifi coin again and again , we want to model that these success toss ar independ .
okai , i'm us the word loos now .
but what is a formal structur ?
thi mean that the result of each toss don't affect the result of other toss .
formal , thi mean there must be a rule of product .
and what we're sai then is the chanc of get a head success on two toss of thi chosen coin on must be cover by a rule of product .
and therefor , the probabl of a intersect b , of get two head in a row given that coin on is be toss , must be , if there is ani justic in thi world , the product of the correspond probabl .
but each of the probabl is on in six .
and therefor , the chanc of two head in a row for coin on should be on in <num> .
observ that in the specif of thi problem , it is implicit and natur that the event a and b ar condition independ given the choic of coin .
of cours , you verifi that given c complement again result in independ for a and b .
in thi case , i'm toss the other coin .
and the chanc is now go to becom <num> in <num> time <num> in <num> , or <num> over <num> .
well , so here's a natur set where condit independ aris natur .
befor we move on , we should paus and sai , well , what can you sai uncondition about the event a and b ?
at the moment i start think about thi , you realiz , well , gee , we have a bit of a problem here .
what is the probabl of the event a , that the first toss result in a head ?
but a sai noth about the chosen coin , so it could be that i toss coin on and i got a head , or it could be that i toss coin two and i got a head .
which of these two case ?
well , thi is not specifi a priori , but in , implicitli here is a natur partit for the problem .
the event c partit the space into two piec , c and c complement .
and therefor , total probabl , addit of probabl measur , allow us to stitch togeth a chain for the probabl of a , in what will be the condit probabl of a head given the particular choic of the coin .
but here we know all the paramet .
the probabl of a given c is on in six .
the probabl of choos coin on is on in two .
the probabl of a given the complement of c is five in six .
the probabl of choos coin <num> is <num> in <num> .
and the fraction assembl , collaps , and give you back on in two .
paus for a moment and sai , did i expect thi ?
and some introspect might convinc you that in fact thi wa to be expect becaus of such beauti symmetri , chanc on in six and five in six , chanc five in six and on in six , that on averag i should get exactli the midpoint .
nice and beauti .
what about the event b ?
well , a littl thought will show you that the analysi is exactli the same .
and therefor , the chanc that you get a head of the second toss of whichev the chosen coin is by total probabl is again on in two .
what about the probabl of a intersect b , that the first and the second toss result in head ?
again , we ar natur go to condit upon whether we chose coin on or coin two , and total probabl give us an ident , the probabl of a intersect b condit on whether coin on wa first chosen or coin two wa first chosen .
and now we simpli write out these probabl .
rememb that a and b ar condition independ given c or given c complement .
given c , a and b have a chanc of on in <num> .
given c complement , a and b have a chanc of <num> squar over <num> squar , or <num> over <num> , as a ballot .
put it all togeth and we've got a simpl ident .
simplifi it , massag the number , and we find we get <num> over <num> .
now , the actual numer valu make littl matter here .
the question at heart , if you're go to ask is thi , ar a and b independ , uncondition ?
well , natur we need to check a rule of product .
is it true that a rule of product p of a to section b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b ?
well , the probabl of a time the probabl of b is on half time on half , which is a quarter .
and that is manifestli not equal to <num> over <num> .
and therefor , the probabl of a intersect b is not equal to the uncondit probabl of a time the uncondit probabl of b .
we conclud that a and b ar not independ uncondition .
there's a slogan we need to extract from thi , okai ?
and what is the slogan ?
that independ can affect thing in unexpect wai , and that in particular , condit independ doe not impli uncondit independ or vice versa .
let us now conclud our lectur with our understand of what we have discov .
summari of tableau <num> , part <num> , a first look at independ .
probabilist , or mathemat , or statist independ captur an inform idea .
inform , we will sai in ordinari languag that two event ar independ if the occurr of on doe not affect the occurr of the other .
thi is inform .
the formal mechan we will put into process here is the follow .
we sai that event a and b , in some probabl space , ar independ if a rule of product is manifest .
the probabl a intersect b is equal to the probabl of a time the probabl of b .
whenev you're ask to check independ , or verifi independ , you should probabl write down that ident .
and ask , is thi true ?
calcul each of the probabl for a to section b , for a , for b .
and ask , do we have an ident ?
do we have a rule of product ?
if you do , then the event ar independ .
if you don't , thei ar not .
we saw that an immedi consequ of thi definit is that if event a and b ar independ , then so ar a complement b .
and , so ar a and b complement .
and so ar a complement , and b complement .
it's veri natur , veri intuit .
the independ of ani pair , it will impli independ for ani combin of complement .
we look at anoth variat on thi problem by ask , what happen if there's condit ?
event a and b ar condition independ , given an ancillari event c , if a rule of product is manifest for condit probabl .
we saw an exampl where thi kind of condit independ aris natur in problem .
a high level idea of where thi aris is where in a problem , weigh mani initi choic , mani pathwai , mani road that could be follow .
a road is chosen fast , and then you follow the characterist of that road .
thi is the kind of set where condit independ is usual manifest within the problem structur .
but , you bear in mind our slogan that condit independ doe not impli independ .
and , of cours , nor doe independ impli condit independ .
thi conclud tableau <num> , part <num> .
what we have done here is establish the foundat for a mathemat , clean , simpl , eleg definit of independ .
the second part of thi tableau will take thi definit , and look at abstract .
look at set where you have mani event , and try to find simpl , clean wai of figur out when independ is bake into the structur .
thi will be the content of tableaux <num> , part <num> .
tableau <num> , part <num> .
repeat independ trial , product space .
the thread or skin of independ run right through the stori of probabl .
in mani wai , it is the central concept in the scienc .
now , thu far , we've built up an idea of independ for a pair of event .
it is now time to build upon thi structur .
and think about independ in a rather more abstract and gener fashion .
at it heart , the idea of independ is codifi in the elementari mathemat observ that independ possibl multipli .
let's go back again to simpl set where we have a finit number of element , and we start put togeth extend multipl tabl .
if you recal in tableau <num> , part <num> , we start by look at an ordinari multipl tabl where we had two element , a row and a column build up an arrai of possibl .
now let's move on to a set slightli more abstract where we have three alphabet .
to distinguish them , we'll us gothic , upper case letter , fanci a , gothic b , and gothic c respect for these three alphabet .
we will deal with a certain amount of abstract by assum that the first alphabet , gothic a , ha got let us sai , l element , label a1 through al .
the alphabet gothic b ha got , sai , m element , label b1 through bm .
and the alphabet gothic c ha got , let us sai , n element , label c1 through cn .
now the dimension is still small enough that we can visual thi .
for exampl , by a three dimension cube .
imagin write down the element of the alphabet gothic a along the x axi .
the element of the alphabet gothic b in the y axi .
and the element of gothic c along the zed axi .
now , the moment you arrang them in thi fashion , we observ that we have variou lattic point , cubicl , grid element , that pop up .
and we can think of arrang them in variou fashion .
so for exampl , if we look at slice .
for exampl , the xy slice , or the x zed slice , or the y zed slice .
you get pair of possibl , that everi pair is an order pair .
on element follow by the other , which tell you all the possibl for that slice .
now there ar three possibl slice and these give rise to three cartesian product .
the cartesian product of a with b , of a with c and b with c .
now of cours there's on more possibl , in order to tripl of possibl a , b , c .
and thi case , now we've got all possibl for cut and dice these three alphabet .
our question now is , how mani wai can we cut and dice in thi fashion ?
and our veri basic elementari principl of count tell us that the number of wai we can arrang order pair a and b is l time m .
it's just a multipl tabl of possibl .
the number of wai we can arrang order pair a and c is l time n .
again , it's an order pair of possibl .
and final , the number of wai of get an order pair of possibl b and c is m time n .
how mani wai ar there of get an order tripl ?
well natur enough , each tripl correspond to a lattic point on a three dimension cube .
a lattic point , or a grid point , thi correspond to each of those cubicl you see in the figur .
and there ar exactli l time m time n such possibl .
veri basic simpl idea , the fundament properti of count that independ possibl multipli .
we can specifi each element in a pair , each element in a tripl independ of the other .
now let's immedi abstract thi princip into a formal definit in a probabilist sens .
of cours , as we've seen , when we're deal with combinatori element , then thi count princip immedi give you a product rule for probabl .
we will now abstract thi to set where the probabl ar not necessarili ration number but could be gener real number .
and thi give us a rule of product .
let's begin by look at three event .
so we will sai that three event in some probabl space , creativ call a , b , and c , ar independ , if and onli if , four relat ar satisfi .
the first three relat talk about a product rule for pair of those three .
a with b , a with c , and b with c .
the last tell you a product rule for all three of them togeth .
independ is a rule of product .
and alreadi , we sai that the set is a littl more complex than when we , what we had for two event .
for two event , you onli have on wai of combin them , a to section b .
but when you have three event , you have mani wai .
now , in thi case , exactli four wai of look at pair or tripl of them .
now , befor you go on , the first three relat look familiar .
thei correspond to independ statement for pair of event .
if the first three relat ar satisfi , then we will , we shall sai that the event a , b and c ar pairwis independ .
but pairwis independ , as we shall see , doe not , in gener , impli independ in the sens that all four relat ar satisfi .
to settl the idea which will immedi look at some simpl exampl .
as alwai , we shall begin with set in elementari context .
and onc we have these firmli under our belt , we shall quickli abstract and gener the principl , befor we look at meati and real world exampl .
so let's start again inevit with the toss of a coin .
consid the follow simpl experi that we've seen oftentim befor .
imagin that a fair coin is toss three time .
to keep matter simpl let us write h for head , t for tail .
which immedi begin by write down what the sampl space of the experi is .
and it's clear , the sampl space is a space of tripl , where we specifi , for exampl , the result of the first toss .
then the result of the second toss and final the result of the third toss .
and we immedi find the finit sampl space of eight element start with the outcom , the sampl point of three head in a row follow by two head and the tail and so forth conclud with three tail in a row .
let's write down certain advanc of interest .
so first , let a be the event that the first toss show head .
b , the event that the second toss show tail .
and c , the event tat the coin toss show head .
befor we move on , we should make sure we identifi the probabl measur .
and in thi set , the coin is fair , the trial ar independ , whatev that mean .
but , in our context , we take thi to mean that the probabl measur at hand is combinatori alloc equal mass to each of the eight atom .
in other word , the atom probabl ar all <num> in <num> .
the simpl and elementari question here , is , ar the event a , b , and c independ ?
natur enough , we anticip thei ar and it might be well to paus the lectur for a moment and see if you can , in fact , determin that thei ar .
well now that you're back , let's take a look at what the variou event of interest ar , and you'll see them on the right of your screen .
the event a is a subset of the sampl point and which subset ?
oh , well clearli .
the first element in the tripl ha to be head , and the remain two element could be anyth whatsoev .
and that give you four possibl , and therefor a ha got a chanc of <num> in <num> , or <num> in <num> .
what about b ?
the second element in a tripl ha to be tail .
and the first and third element can be anyth , anyth whatsoev .
and again , you have four possibl , and therefor , the chanc ar of b ar <num> in <num> , or again , <num> in <num> .
and final , c is all those tripl where the third element in the tripl is a head , the first two be anyth whatsoev .
four possibl onc more .
<num> in <num> give you a chanc of on half , sai .
what about a intersect b ?
thi in word , correspond to the event that the first toss show head and the second toss show tail .
thi then correspond to all those tripl where the first element is h , the next element is t , and the third element can be either h or t .
and again , now we have exactli two possibl .
so the chanc of a intersect b ar two , in <num> or <num> in <num> .
likewis , the chanc of a intersect c and b intersect c ar again , <num> in <num> .
final , we'll look at a tripl of intersect , a , with b , with c .
thi correspond to the english statement , that the first toss show head , the second toss show tail , and the third toss show head .
there is exactli on tripl with thi characterist .
the tripl hth , and therefor , a intersect b intersect c is inde an atom .
a singleton set consist of on sampl point .
the chanc of a intersect b intersect c then ar natur <num> in <num> .
and we immedi observ that we have a rule of product .
for pairwis intersect , on quarter is manifestli on half time on half , and therefor , we have a rule of product for all pairwis intersect .
likewis , <num> in <num> is on half time on half time on half , and again , we have a rule of product manifest itself for tripl intersect .
all four condit for independ ar satisfi .
and therefor , we conclud without further ado that as we anticip , the event a , b and c ar inde independ .
it give us a warm , comfort feel when elementari calcul give us result in accord with our nativ intuit .
all thi is sure an encourag first step .
let's move onto anoth set , just to settl the concept .
again , a set which is veri familiar .
let's look at the set of dice .
okai .
here's an exampl construct by the soviet , russian mathematician s n bernstein .
imagin that a die is thrown twice .
of cours , we imagin that it is a fair die .
that it's got six face .
the face ar number on through six .
we immedi then identifi the sampl space by identifi a system of order pair , j and k , let us sai .
where j repres the face shown by the first throw of the die , k the face shown by the second throw of the die .
of cours , j and k ar integ valu run between on and six .
and therefor , there ar <num> possibl for these pair .
the sampl space ha got <num> atom .
let's look at it , some event that we can construct from thi experi .
so , let a be the event that the first throw show an odd number .
other word , the first throw show on , three , or five .
let b be the event that the second throw show an even number .
in other word , the second throw show a face two , four , or six .
now let's put togeth a composit event and sai .
what c show is the event describ the attribut that the sum of the face valu in the two throw is an odd number .
rememb face valu will add up to valu between <num> and <num> .
so the sum of the face valu be odd will correspond to all pair , for which the sum is <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> .
well we have three event yeah .
but befor we proce let's identifi the probabl measur .
and natur enough the die is fair , the repeat throw ar independ whatev that mean .
and what in our context will identifi thi is to sai that you have <num> atom in thi experi .
it is go to be a combinatori set .
where everi atom is equal like .
and therefor , all atom probabl ar <num> in <num> .
and again , the question .
ar these event a , b and c independ ?
paus the lectur and run a rule through the definit to see whether you can check on whether thi in fact is valid .
all right now let's come back and identifi all the event of interest in thi problem .
so , let's start with the event a .
the first face is odd .
that mean we ar look at all the order pair , j and k , where j is an odd number .
in other word j is on , three or five .
what about k ?
well , k could be anyth whatsoev .
in other word , we're look at order pair of the follow characterist .
<num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and so on through <num> , <num> .
<num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and so on through <num> , <num> .
and final , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and so on through <num> , <num> .
okai , what is the probabl of thi ?
well , sinc the first element can be specifi in three wai .
the second element is unfett , can be specifi in six wai .
there ar <num> time <num> , or <num> wai of specifi such order pair .
<num> out of <num> give you a chanc of <num> in <num> .
it's veri comfort , becaus of cours , we understand that the event that the first phase show odd by symmetri .
should have the same chanc as the event that the first phase show even .
but of cours it is comfort to have the formal calcul verifi as a intuit correct answer .
let's quickli run through b .
the event of b is , describ a set where the second throw show an even face .
which mean you're look all order pair .
rememb event ar subset of the sampl space .
the sampl space here is a space of pair .
which order pair take the box for b .
well , you look at all other pair j and k where k is an even number , two , four , or six .
and of cours , j could be anyth whatsoev , on through six .
again , the chanc of thi .
there ar six possibl for the first element , three for the second .
therefor there ar <num> time <num> over <num> possibl in favor of the event b out of <num> possibl .
and therefor again , b natur and inevit ha got a probabl of on and two .
what about c ?
a littl more complex , but we can break thi down .
rememb a game c repres the event that the sum of face valu is odd .
our first rule of busi is to identifi those pair which trigger thi event .
rememb game c ha to be subset of pair .
which pair ?
well , if a sum of two integ is odd , that must necessarili mean that on of the integ is even , and the other is odd .
but thi can happen in two wai , j could be even , and k , odd or , j could be odd , and k , even .
what ar the chanc of thi happen ?
well , j odd .
well there ar three wai of j be odd , on , three , or five .
k even .
well there ar three wai of k be even , two , four , or six .
and therefor , there ar <num> time <num> , or <num> wai , for j be odd and k be even .
and , by the same kind of argument , there ar exactli <num> time <num> wai , or <num> wai , of j be even , and k , odd .
altogeth , you have <num> plu <num> or <num> outcom favor to the event c out of <num> .
and again , c ha got a probabl , <num> and <num> .
a littl introspect should tell us thi is also to be expect .
again , there is full symmetri in thi game .
and therefor , about half the time we should get an odd sum and about half the time we should get an even sum .
and the calcul support thi .
let us know consid the intersect of pair of these event .
what doe it mean to sai a intersect b ?
thi mean that the first face show an odd number .
and on the second throw the face show an even number .
in other word , we ar look at order pair j and k where j is odd .
there ar three possibl .
k is even .
there ar three possibl .
therefor there ar <num> time <num> or <num> possibl out of <num> .
and therefor , the chanc of a intersect b is <num> in <num> .
but a veri similar argument work for a to section c and b to section c .
let's take a look a intersect c for our differ .
a repres the event that the first phase is odd .
c repres the event that the sum of the face valu is odd .
but if the first face is odd , j is odd .
and the sum of j and k is odd , that forc k to be even .
and therefor , a intersect c is precis that collect of order pair j and k .
where j is an odd number , on , three or five and k is an even number , two , four or six .
and again , there ar <num> time <num> or <num> possibl out of <num> .
it's again , <num> in <num> .
and b intersect c , likewis .
is again order pair j and k , where j is odd and k is even .
in other word , a intersect b , a intersect c and b intersect c ar all exactli the same event .
the english descript on the left give you differ flavor of thi event .
but thei all describ exactli the same object .
and therefor , it is not at all surpris that all these object have the same probabl , <num> in <num> .
what about a intersect b intersect c ?
hm .
the first phase is odd .
the next throw show an even phase , and the sum is odd .
but , if the first phase is odd , and the second phase is even , the sum is forc to be odd .
thi is anoth wai of sai that the event a intersect b is contain in or impli the occurr of the event c .
and therefor , a intersect b intersect c is just a to section b itself .
which mean that a intersect b intersect c .
case of all pair where j is odd and k is even , and there ar exactli nine such pair .
which give you a chanc of on in four .
okai , let's paus now and see how we're do with our rule of product on and four .
and sure on half time on half .
and therefor for all pair , a and b , a and c , b and c a rule of product is manifest .
but for a tripl on quarter is manifestli not on half time on half time on half .
and therefor , the rule of product is violat when you have the three intersect .
what we have discov is a , b and c ar pairwis independ , but thei ar not independ jointli .
when we sai independ when there ar mani event float around , we'll alwai mean jointli and we'll drop the descriptor .
okai .
so , the moral of the stori is that independ is a rule of four properti when you're talk about independ of three event .
exampl have led us to conclud that independ certainli impli pairwis independ .
if all four rule ar satisfi , then manifestli the first three ar satisfi .
so when you have joint independ , pairwis independ is impli .
but just have the first three of those properti satisfi doe not impli that all four ar satisfi .
pairwis independ doe not impli independ in gener .
and inde , these four relat that describ independ for three event at a time ar insepar .
in a sens , that no three of them impli a fourth .
i will let you explor exampl along these line in your problem for solut .
tableau nine , part three , independ , warp and the woof of the fabric of chanc .
i am be a littl whimsic here , indulg in a metaphor from fabric and textil .
the warp and the woof refer to the thread that run across a fabric .
and in a veri real sens , the idea of independ is a scale or a thread that run through the entir theori of chanc .
understand independ properli allow us , open a door into manifold applic and a richer understand of the theori .
so , thu far we've built up a formal idea of what independ mean and we've seen how independ can aris in situat where there ar repeat independ trial .
in thi lectur , we will move on and look at three set , rich , interest , applic wide , and where independ aris , sometim subtli , sometim overtli .
and we shall see the consequ ar profound and signific in their own right .
so , without further ado , let's begin with our first applic , an applic in gambl , the casino game of crap .
now , thi is an old friend .
we've seen the game of crap introduc in tableau three , part three .
and so , let us refresh our memori as to the structur of thi game .
now admittedli thi is a dice game where on repeatedli throw a pair of dice , but the rule ar arcan , peculiar , singular .
the wai thi game function is on throw a pair of dice , look at the face valu and sum them .
if the sum of the face valu is a <num> or a <num> or a <num> then you lose immedi .
if the sum of the face valu happen to be <num> or <num> then you win immedi .
it get interest if the sum of face valu is on of the remain number , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> .
in that case the game progress by repeatedli throw thi pair of dice and sum the face valu .
and stop at the first moment when either the first thrown number is replic or a <num> is thrown .
if you're lucki enough to replic what you first threw , you win .
if you have the misfortun of throw a <num> , you lose .
strang , peculiar .
now , we saw by an elementari analysi that the chanc of win on the first throw , that is to sai the chanc of throw a <num> or an <num> is twice that of lose on the first throw .
that is to sai throw a <num> or a <num> or a <num> .
doe that suggest that the introvert gambler is justifi in go forward and plai thi game ?
or not so hasti we should do an analysi and understand what happen in the remain case .
so let us go back and put togeth a probabl space for thi problem .
the fundament question , of cours , is what is the probabl that a gambler will win in a game of crap ?
the reader who doe not recal how we put togeth the probabl space might want to take a break and go back to tableau three , part three and reconstruct the sampl space for thi experi , but to summar here ar the sell point .
for each throw of the pair of dice , we're go to sum the face valu , and the residu experi then can be thought of , as have an alphabet of the number <num> through <num> .
and we've seen that the appropri probabl measur , the atom measur , attach to each of these possibl is <num> in <num> for <num> , <num> in <num> for <num> , <num> in <num> for <num> and so on with <num> in <num> for <num> .
and the probabl decreas at pace , <num> in <num> , <num> in <num> and back down to <num> in <num> for <num> .
now what is the sampl space for thi conjoin experi ?
and clearli here we have a set where we have repeat independ trial .
each throw is independ of the previou throw , with a termin condit , these ar the peculiar rule of the game .
so , let's start with a sampl space .
it is clear that on wai of engend a sampl point is to throw on of the number , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> , <num> .
so , the singl letter , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> constitut a bona fide sampl point of experi .
but if on throw <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> , then the experi continu .
and we get a success , a sequenc of number .
let's sai the game is continu in thi latter case , through n trial , we then obtain a success , a sequenc of number , k1 , k2 , k3 , through k sub n , where n is <num> or larger .
and k1 is on of the number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> .
and the remain number ar specifi as follow , the final number kn ha to be either a start number k1 or <num> .
in the former case you win , in the latter case you will lose .
the number which ar sandwich in between these bookend number k1 and kn , the number k2 through kn minu <num> have all to be ani of the number except the origin number k1 , or <num> .
all such sequenc constitut valid , bona fide sampl point of the experi .
and the sampl space , then , is a collect of those singl number and all such valid sequenc .
excel , now we understand what thi sampl space is , what the probabl game is .
what ar the event of interest to us ?
well natur enough , the primari event of interest to us , is that we win .
let's call thi event w .
w then , is a subset of the sampl point .
what ar the sampl point that trigger w ?
what ar the sampl point that ar favor for w ?
well w certainli includ the singl letter <num> and <num> .
if you throw <num> or <num> on the first try you win .
w also includ all sequenc k1 through kn where k1 is on of the six number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> .
kn is the same as k1 .
and the number k2 through kn minu <num> and between can be neither k1 nor <num> .
all such subsequ will then trigger the event that you win the event w .
of cours thi is a subset of the sampl space .
the probabl measur is a natur probabl measur obtain as a product measur .
we simpli multipli atom probabl .
now befor we get ani further we should paus to examin the problem to understand what it is made up of .
it is never wise to jump into an analysi without first understand what the structur of the problem is .
here we have a problem with mani possibl step , the step ar guid by the first step .
thi bring to mind a veri simpl partit that we've encount befor .
thi is the principl of lao tzu , a long journei of a thousand mile begin with a singl step .
we've seen an invoc of thi principl earlier when we talk about the ballot problem .
we condit , we partit the space by look at what happen in the last step of the count .
now here is a problem where the first step is peculiarli interest and inform .
accordingli , let's start with our first guid principl of addit , a partit of the space base upon the veri first step in the sequenc .
write f2 , for the event , that the first throw result in a <num> , f3 for the event that the first row result in a <num> , and so on , fk repres the event , that the first row result in a number k , k run between <num> and <num> .
it is clear that the first throw ha to result in some number from <num> through <num> .
it's also clear that you can't have two possibl number from the first throw .
the event fk , the event f2 through f12 partit the sampl space .
it's a beauti , eleg , and simpl understand of how doe gamer proceed .
but there's on more partit which is , bake into the cake , as it were .
let's paus and think about what is the essenti natur of the sampl point .
true , the sampl point ar determin by what happen first , but there's someth els at plai here .
the sampl point themselv could constitut sequenc of trial termin at some specif kind of trial .
the moment on ha a sequenc that suggest that win or lose can be broken down in to win or lose after a certain number of step , so suppos we win , well we could win on the first trial or the second or the third and so on .
let us now take talk of thi understand and creat a littl more notat .
in a natur notat let us write w with a subscript n to connot the event , that you win at the nth trial .
n , of cours , can run through the introduc <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth .
if you win at all , you're go to have to win at some trial , and so the event w sub n , w1 , w2 , w3 , and so forth , partit the event w into disjoint or mutual exclus piec .
now these two realiz coupl with an underli appeal to independ , to the product measur will wrap everyth up beautifulli and delic .
let us now put our result to good us .
ultim of cours , we ar interest in how a particular gene propag through gener , possibl veri mani , right .
our lesson so far is the follow .
if , in a parent gener , the lethal gene is manifest or proffer in the mate popul in a proport , let us sai , on in ten , or <num> , then , in the filial gener , that lethal gene will be proffer with a slightli smaller probabl of on in eleven .
imagin now that we have a success of gener , and we will simplifi matter here .
in each gener , the proport of the lethal gene that is proffer in the mate popul satisfi a simpl relat to the proport of the lethal gene in the mate popul of the previou gener .
it is given by the relationship , the reciproc of q prime , is equal to the reciproc of q plu on , on the upper right of your screen .
bear in mind , that thi factor q repres on half of the proport of heterozyg element in the mate popul .
rememb the fraction of heterozyg element in the parent mate popul wa twice v over <num> minu w .
and of that fraction , on half of that give you exactli the chanc of a particular lethal gene be proffer dure mate .
now imagin that we have a set where you start from some , sai , progenitor , a gener zero , if you will , where the genotyp exist under proport u sub <num> , twice v sub <num> , w sub <num> .
from the progenitor , imagin here we have gener on , then gener two thereaft , three , four , so forth and so on go down to let just sai the nth gener .
in each gener , the genotyp frequenc chang , and we will make a simplifi assumpt here , that we identifi the actual proport in the popul with their expect probabl .
in other word , for gener <num> , let us sai the proport ar u1 , 2v1 , w1 .
gener two , u2 , 2v2 , w2 , and so on and so forth , and in gener n the proport of the three genotyp ar in the n the ratio u sub n , 2v sub n , and w sub n .
of cours , we're interest in what happen to the lethal gene , as you progress through the gener .
let us consid the nth gener as the filial gener and the n minu 1th as the parent gener to start matter off .
we have , by look at the top right of your screen , identifi q prime with q sub n , and identifi q with q sub n minu <num> , the reciproc relationship .
the reciproc of q n is the reciproc of q n minu <num> plu <num> .
now paus for a moment , now thi is beguil becaus now we've just move matter up to the n minu 1th gener .
if we think of them as a filial gener , and the n minu 2th gener as the parent gener , then we can either defin q n minu on with q prime in the upper right of your figur , and now q n minu two with q .
and therefor , thi devolv into the equat , the reciproc of q n minu <num> plu <num> , plu <num> from the previou line .
but again , now i can think of n minu <num> as the filial gener , and n minu <num> as the parent gener , which give us the next step in the process , the reciproc of q n minu <num> plu <num> , plu <num> , plu <num> .
and of cours now we can continu thi process again and again , and of cours you recogn the process of induct .
and eventu get up to the progenitor gener at which point we'll have the reciproc of q <num> , the origin proport of the littl gene in the origin mate popul .
and now we have accumul n 1s , on each time we step through a gener .
and therefor , we have got thi beauti and eleg result .
the reciproc of the proport of the lethal gene in the nth gener is given by the reciproc of the lethal gene in the progenitor gener , which is some fix number , whatev it is , plu n .
of cours now we realli ar interest in actual proport , so we should just flip the fraction over and if we do that , we obtain a beauti and eleg result q sub n on the left is equal to the reciproc of q <num> to the power of minu <num> plu n .
on can hardli have hope for a much simpler express for the wai thing evolv as the system progress .
now we should paus and take a good hard look at thi .
what is thi tell us ?
so ultim , at the end of thi exercis , we do have an eleg and simpl formul , but what doe it sai ?
now to be sure , our analysi ha been of necess simplist .
we have assum , for exampl , that the proport of the genotyp in each gener , coincid with their expect valu .
in practic , of cours , there will be natur stochast variat of the actual proport of the popul , in each of these genotyp just due to natur probabilist variat .
we've ignor the possibl for exampl of a , a popul explos , of mutat and so on .
but nonetheless , even such a simplifi analysi give us biometr inform .
it tell us larg trend in the set .
so we should conclud with a slogan .
in a set where on ha a recess and lethal gene , we anticip that a lethal gene will be eventu excis from the popul , eill eventu die out , but the rate of decai is painfulli slow .
it goe as slowli as the harmon seri .
the listen mai recal darwin's warn that natur select and evolut . proce over veri larg time scale .
the kind of phenomenon we have discov in the dissolut of a lethal gene is indic of the gener kind of phenomena on should expect .
random mix and select take a long time , and thi is support of the gener theme .
darwin's theori is on of the great jewel of human thought and endeavor .
it wa contenti to begin with but over the cours of the centuri , the amount of evid in it favor is , ha becom so larg that it , it ha becom on of the defin theori of the ag .
a , a wonder and deep and subtl understand of the veri natur of the evolut of speci .
on should not expect all our applic to be on quit so sublim a level .
so for our next applic , let's go back to our first principl , to our veri first lectur , go back to an issu in the psycholog of sport .
the listen will recal our introductori topic where we discuss the phenomena of the hot hand in sport .
for definit we focus on basketbal .
consid a player who histor make on basket out of everi two shot that he take .
dure the cours of the game , he goe on a run , and he make five basket in a row .
and we conclud that he ha a hot hand .
he cannot miss .
as we discuss , there ar two possibl in front of us .
the first , goe along with convent wisdom .
to it , that , if a basketbal player who is tradition a <num> shooter , make on out of two basket , goe on a streak and hit five basket in a row .
now five basket in a row would be unusu , the chanc of that should be about <num> in <num> .
if someth as unlik as that happen , then the presumpt is that someth is go on with the player .
he is in an alter state temporarili where instead of make on in everi two basket he is now go to make everi basket .
and if thi is the case , then it is natur for other player on the team .
to feed him the ball as much as possibl , so that thei can milk hi run of success while the go is good .
of cours thi is compel .
we all feel instinct that thi is the case and we all bui into thi phenomenon of the hot hand .
we've seen thi repeatedli , in basketbal and in other sport .
in tenni and basebal , and so on .
but there is anoth altern .
and that is a counter intuit suggest that the string of success we're see amidst mani trial is not at all unexpect .
that in fact on should expect thi .
that thi is not unusu .
of cours if thi is the case , then our feel about the hot hand is a cognit illus .
which of these two possibl is the right on ?
and we articul a principl statist test .
william feller , the probabilist , ha asserv that even strong faith must be fortifi by a statist test , and a test wa natur to put togeth in that context .
the string of attempt by the player in question , will see a run of success and failur in some order .
and in that mixtur somewher is a subsequ of five or more success in a row .
superfici , thi look like the result of toss a coin repeatedli .
and then our question now becom is the particular sequenc of attempt at the basket by the player , doe that look statist differ from what on would expect if on had toss a coin repeatedli ?
now if the profil of the item in the basket is statist similar to that of the toss of a coin , then there is no reason to imagin that the basketbal player's do anyth unusu .
and , thi lead to a slogan .
the more like it is that a success run of the observ length occur somewher in a sequenc of coin toss , the less the credenc we place upon a mysteri hot hand .
after all , if the basketbal player's attempt at the basket ar static indistinguish from toss a coin repeatedli , then we realli have noth more to sai on the matter .
it's as if everi shot wa a on in two chanc and there's noth magic which govern on's .
now when we first postul thi as a basic principl , we said , thi sound reason , but technic , it look confound .
it look difficult to analyz .
there were too mani piec move around , and it wa hard to , to understand how to begin a logic attempt at the problem .
but we're all grown up now .
we now have a lot of background and tool at our dispos .
and now we're equip to come back to the problem with a principl analysi .
thi come up next .
now at the heart of the test that we ar propos is a consider of a string of coin toss .
and ask question about the likelihood of a run of success , a subsequ of success somewher in that sequenc .
to begin to make progress , we're go to have to understand how to describ success run in a neat and compact mathemat formula .
so , let's begin , by take a look at a made up sequenc of coin toss .
<num> repres a head or a success .
<num> repres a tail or a failur .
and what i've shown you on the screen is a sequenc of <num> trial .
of cours , we ar assum that everi trial is an independ trial .
and so we ar deal with repeat independ trial , and underli all of thi is a product space and a product measur .
now in the long string , those 1s and 0s ar altern around , thei're bounc around .
but in the middl and at the end , we see string of repeat on , repeat success .
and so clearli , here's an exampl of a sequenc of <num> toss , where there ar sequenc of five or more success at on or more place .
to keep at accur account of when success run occur , we will need to do two thing .
first , figur out what length of success run is of immedi import .
in thi case , let us sai we're go to look at success run of length five , five and more .
the second , and thi is import , is as a convent we imagin that we start the sequenc of toss at , on the left , work our wai toward our right , look for five success in a row .
the first time it happen we sai here is a first success run .
here , here visibl , now mark in red , is an exampl of what i mean .
the first success run of length five occur at trial <num> .
now , and thi is critic .
we reset the the clock , if you like , at trial <num> .
we sai we have a renew .
and it's as if we begin the coin toss anew with trial <num> .
and then we proce all the wai up to trial <num> where we discov anoth string of file .
and sai , okai , hold it .
we have a new renew .
of cours , on trial <num> wa the second success run .
now notic there wa a success immedi after trial <num> , but that is part of the renew of the next stage of the new sequenc of toss that ha start after the success run .
we now begin anew at trial <num> .
proce all the wai until trial <num> where we have the next success run .
and we proce in thi fashion .
so , at the heart of thi idea is that we start from the left , with the first toss , proce to the first occurr of the success run of length five that you're interest in , consid a renew to have taken place , a new sequenc of coin toss to have been initi from that point on , what will the next success run , a new renew , the next success run , and so on .
of cours , when you've ti the success run of length five , it is possibl that it is part of a larger success run .
but for our purpos right now , grant length six or seven ar not german , we ar worri about run of length five .
and of cours eventu we'll want to take a step back and tackl run of ani length .
but for the time be , let us focu on run of length five .
here's on more exampl of a sequenc of <num> toss and in red i have outlin where the success run have termin , have occur .
start from the left again on the 10th trial we have the first success run of length five .
the clock start again immedi with trial <num> .
but here , we actual have a veri long string of consecut success .
so , from <num> to <num> give you an immedi new success run .
the clock start again .
we have a renew , from trial <num> , a new run start .
and we find that we have consecut success , culmin in trial <num> , with yet anoth success run .
trial <num> happen to be a success , but we don't quit complet the success run , so we move on now all the wai up to trial <num> , when the next success run come into place .
so thi is at the heart of a convent .
we go from left to right and each time we have a success run , we have a renew .
it's as if the coin toss start anew .
now we understand .
we come to a right understand of what a success run is in our set .
now to make probabilist progress on thi , we have to be abl to identifi what the probabl space in question is .
and so let's go back to first principl .
so here's a sampl run of toss with variou success run identifi , the first success run at trial <num> , the next success run at trial <num> , the next success run at trial <num> and so on .
our veri first question , natur , what is the sampl space for thi problem ?
what is the space of ideal outcom that repres thi chanc experi ?
now , there ar a coupl of wai we could go about thi .
but , the most gener and extens fashion is to think of a gedankenexperi where a coin is toss repeatedli indefinit often .
the outcom of the toss , call them x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 , x5 , and so forth , repres success and failur , <num>'s and <num>'s .
and thi entir sequenc of <num>'s and <num>'s , will repres a sampl point or an ideal outcom for thi experi .
of cours , as we've seen in tableau six , part two , that is a danger penn tableau and if the listen ha , ha had the fortitud to walk through it , she would have seen that thi lead to actual a veri rich and complex space .
it actual lead to the continuum .
now the subtleti of the continuum ar not go to be german for our purpos but thi is just to understand that even simpl set could read , lead to veri complex problem .
but in principl we now have an understand of what an outcom in thi experi is .
practic simplic is go to be a turn for us becaus we ar go to essenti termin the experi after n trial and ask question about what happen in n trial .
in which case we'll deal with repeat independ trial over the financ domain .
but we're jump ahead of ourselv .
our next quest natur should be in thi space of sampl point , what ar the even of interest ?
so let us sai that the basketbal player in question ha taken in short and we're interest in whether in that sequenc of n activ to the basket , there is a string of five or more success , consecut .
so natur , the event of interest to us is event that there is at least on success run of length five at or befor the end of the trial .
let us call thi event s sub n .
of cours , in our sampl space , thi correspond to all sequenc of trial where in the first n trial , you discov consecut subsequ of five or more on .
now , connect to thi natur event s sub n is the event q sub n , which is the complement of s sub n , which is the event that , in the first n trial , there is no success run of length five , homo .
now we should paus .
thi event sn is what is german for us .
and we would like to sai someth eventu about it probabl .
but that look like a veri complic endeavor .
there ar veri , veri mani wai in which on could put in a consecut sequenc of file on somewher in a long sequenc of n toss .
and tabul and captur all of them systemat look to be a veri difficult task .
natur , we will try to break thi task up into simpl piec , partit it so that the individu piec becom transpar and we can glue thing togeth .
in other word , we're go to try to us addit by find proper partit of the space .
and littl thought will tell us that we're worri about sequenc of five head , five success somewher in the sequenc , a natur event of interest then is a question of , well , what is the first run of five success ?
doe that all come ?
and so accordingli , let's promptli defin a new event , anticip that thi just might be us in stitch togeth a bigger pictur .
for each valu n , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and so forth let f sub n repres the event that the first success run of length five occur at trial n .
now there ar other possibl .
if you're at the 8th trial and a success run occur at it , it could be the first success on .
but it could be a 2nd , 3rd or subsequ success run .
let's promptli introduc a littl more notat to captur thi richer possibl .
let u sub n repres the event that there is some success run , the first or subsequ , which occur at trial n .
all right , now we have three event at hand .
sn , it complement fn , and un .
n of cours is an index , and be allow to , to run freeli ov , over the posit integ .
we'd like to sai someth about the probabl of these thing , n .
and of cours , natur , the question is , what is the underli probabl measur that's go to fuel these probabl ?
and as i've mention , the underli sampl space is veri rich .
it actual expand the continuum of possibl .
but for our purpos we can afford to look at finit string of toss at a time .
and what come to our rescu immedi is the fact that the probabl measur is implicitli specifi by the fact that we're deal with a set of repeat independ trial .
for ani given n , we're effect deal with a product space and a product measur .
the comput , the probabl ar go to becom almost transpar in consequ of thi kei observ .
and immedi , with thi at the back of our mind , let's introduc a littl notat for the probabl of the event in question just to keep our notat a littl more compact to prevent it from burgeon .
so let's us lowercas letter for the probabl of the associ event , lowercas s then for the probabl of the event big s of n , lowercas q of n for the probabl of the event big q sub n , littl f sub n and littl u sub n respect for the probabl of the event big f sub n and big u sub n respect .
so befor we go forward into a full fledg analysi of these probabl , we should begin by explor the ground , see the layout , understand what we can sai about these probabl in simpl set .
what ar the boundari condit that ar known to us ?
so accordingli , let's start by look at the first few trial , trial <num> through <num> .
our immedi observ is the follow .
we ar interest in section on of length five .
therefor it is manifestli imposs that ani success run of length five conclud on or befor the 4th trial , and therefor the probabl f1 , u1 , s1 , f2 , u2 , s2 , f3 , u3 , s3 , and f4 , u4 , s4 ar all ident <num> .
what about the possibl of a success run at trial <num> ?
well , of cours , thi is possibl .
and there's onli on wai in which thi can be accomplish , and that is , if on start with a sequenc of five success , five on in a row .
and the moment thi happen , we'll have trigger a first success run , in fact the onli possibl success run at trial <num> .
and the probabl of thi , becaus we're deal with repeat independ trial , is natur , on half time on half time on half time on half time on half , or <num> to the power minu <num> , nice and simpl .
what about the next trial ?
what can we sai about f6 , u6 , and s6 ?
paus the lectur while you take thi in , and think about what the problem set give you in thi context .
resum the lectur when you're readi .
you're back .
let's take a look at a pictur .
let us consid the first six trial .
if there is a success run occur on trial <num> , then in the first trial of the tabl , you will see , we must have <num>'s in a row .
the probabl of that is <num> to the power minu <num> .
but what if a success run termin on the 6th trial .
now if that happen , it is manifestli the case that trial to prove six must give you five consecut <num>'s .
but it also constrain what must happen on trial <num> .
the <num>st trial can not be <num> itself becaus if that were the case then a success run would alreadi have conclud at trial <num> .
by a convent , rememb we ar count from left to right and start a new , the renew everi time we get a success run .
so if there is to be a success run at trial <num> , we must start the sequenc off with a failur on the first trial .
but thi now give us a set where in the first <num> trial , i start with a failur , and then i have five consecut success , success and failur ar equal like .
the coin is fair .
thei each have a probabl of on half , and therefor , thi particular run of six , failur with five success ha probabl on half time on half time on half time on half time on half time on half , or f6 and u<num> ar both <num> to the power minu <num> .
what can we sai about s6 ?
the probabl that there is a success run of length five at or befor their 6th trial .
and a littl introspect tell us that thi can onli happen if either there is a first success run at trial <num> , or there is a first success run at trial <num> , which mean that s6 is simpli f5 plu f6 .
becaus these two event ar disjoint , or thei ar mutual exclus .
you can have a success run at , at trial <num> , but then you will not have a success run at trial <num> , or vice versa .
and put togeth the algebra valu we find that we get <num> time <num> to the power minu <num> .
what do we appeal to ?
a univers , subtl and marvel principl of addit , the whole here wa a sum of the two part .
of cours , we could go on from here and comput f7 , u7 , f7 , f8 , u8 , s8 , and so on .
and the listen will have realiz that the probabl f n and u n will actual coincid all the wai up till trial number <num> .
and that is becaus through the first nine trial , it is onli possibl to have a singl success run of length <num> at most .
on can't have two success run of length <num> in the first nine trial .
so the first place where f and u start to differ , start to diverg , is at trial <num> .
of cours , the s n probabl ar more complex .
thei have to take into account not onli a success run at a given point , but also possibl previou success run .
do it by hand and work your wai forward doe not seem to appeal .
thi is look to becom algebra cumbrou .
and so it would be wise for us to step back and take a look at the larger pictur , see what we can deduc about the problem .
and of cours , a kei principl is immedi suggest , that of addit , partit the problem into a proper piec .
so let's start by deconstruct the occurr of success run again .
suppos we ar look at trial n and we're ask , what is the chanc s n that there is a success run of length <num> at or befor the nth trial ?
a kei principl immedi suggest itself , and that is the follow .
if there is a success run at or befor the nth trial , then manifestli there must be a first success run somewher earlier in the sequenc .
thi is a necessari and suffici condit for there to be a sucess run at or befor the nth trial .
and that immedi suggest to us a partit for the problem .
recal the event at hand of interest to us is the even s n that there is a success run of length <num> at or befor the nth trial .
well , for thi to happen , there wa either a first success run at trial <num> , or a first success run at trial <num> , or at trial <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth , or a first success run at trial n .
in other word , s sub n is the union of f1 , f2 , f3 through f n .
now , the student will have realiz that i'm belabor what appear to be a simpl point , but thi is kei .
there also appear to be a certain amount of redund here , becaus f1 is empti , f2 is an empti set , so is f3 , so is f4 .
on cannot have a success run occur at or befor the first , second , third , or fourth trial .
but it is unwis to unnecessarili complic our notat .
we mai as well start with the first trial , keep in mind eventu that the probabl for the first four trial ar go to vanish quietli like the snow of yesteryear .
so , let's sai then that we have a partit .
s n is the union of n disjoint event f1 , f2 , through f n .
of cours the principl of addit promptli ride to the rescu .
the probabl of s n , then , must be the sum of the attend probabl of f1 , f2 , through f n .
or in our compact notat , s n must be equal to f1 plu f2 plu f3 , through f n .
we spent a fair amount of time on what , in retrospect , will appear fairli simpl .
but the idea of link a success run somewher in a sequenc to first success run is not immedi obviou .
and it is thi kei idea that allow us to open up the problem .
and therefor it is worth spend time on it , relish it , understand it .
what we've got here is a slogan .
we ar interest in the probabl s n .
and what our addit principl tell us , what our partit tell us , is , if we know the first success run probabl f1 , f2 , f3 , and so on , then we can deduc the probabl s n of a success run somewher at or befor that point .
thi is our first slogan , and we're go to , thi is of cours a polit ag , so we're go to build it in a sequenc of slogan , and eventu we'll get to where we want to get to .
but thi is a good start point .
we have decompos a problem into bite size piec .
our question now ar , well , what can we sai about the f's ?
thi come up next .
so let's take stock of , of where we ar .
we ar interest in the probabl sn .
that there's a success run of length five at or befor the nth trial .
and we've just decompos it beautifulli into a sum of probabl f1 through f n .
where the f's repres the probabl of a first success run occur at a certain point .
anoth question now on imagin , well , we've reduc all , we've move the problem from comput s's to comput f's .
how doe on comput the f's ?
we appeal onc more to addit .
let's paus and think about what it take for a success run at to occur at the nth trial .
here is a kei principl , a success run will termin or occur at trial n if and onli if , there is a first success run occur at some trial j at or befor n .
let's think about thi again .
if a success run occur at trial n then either it is a first success run , in which case there's a first success run at trial n , or there is a , a prior success run .
and if there's a prior success run , eventu there must be a first success run , which then must have termin at some trial j .
so the pictur is someth like thi .
for some j between on through n , there must have been a success run that termin at that j .
we now have a renew .
the coin toss effect begin anew with trial j plu <num> as a first trial .
and then proce on through trial n where we're told that there is a success run .
of cours , the success run occur at j is the first success run .
follow that , we have a new sequenc of toss as it were , but in that sequenc of toss , we could have on or more success run .
but you ar guarante that there will be on success run termin at n .
thi ha broken the problem up into two beauti piec .
in the first piec , we have a first success run .
which is occur at trial j , by definit the probabl of that occurr is f sub j .
now what about a second piec ?
now where we have a renew , the coin toss have effect begun a new , with a new count .
j plu <num> is the essenti the first toss in the new sequenc .
and the nth toss in the new sequenc is now the n minu jth toss in the sequenc .
there ar n minu j trial follow j and lead up to n .
and in those n minu j trial , we find that a success of phi on termin in a success run at a last of those trial .
there ar n minu zero trial with a success run at trial n minu j .
and our notat at a termin d tell us the probabl of that is u sub n minu j .
notic the trial ar repeat and independ .
we've got a statist ident version of the experi which ha been start again at trial j plu on .
and now we write n minu j trial , culmin in a success run .
and therefor the probabl is u of n minu j .
now let's stitch both piec togeth .
the kei is that the piec correspond to disjoint trial .
and recal the basic principl of independ , event devolv upon non overlap trial must be manifestli independ .
and therefor , the occurr of the first event is independ of the occurr of the second event and therefor the probabl of an entir sequenc is just a multipl of probabl f j time u n minu j .
notic how elegantli and simpli independ and product measur have finess what could have been a veri difficult calcul .
now , what we've discov is that if there's a first success run at trial j , follow by anoth success run at trial n , the probabl of that is fj time u of n minu j .
now we simpli appeal to addit .
to stitch togeth the variou possibl for where the first success run could occur .
if it occur in the first trial , then you have f on time u n minu on .
if it occur in the second trial you have f two time u n minu two .
if it occur in the jth trial you have j time u n minu j , and so on .
if it occur in the penultim trial you have f n minu <num> time u <num> .
and if it occur in the last trial then you just have f n .
of cours , all these event ar disjoint , and by addit , onc more , u n is a sum of the probabl of the form f j u n minu j on the right hand side .
oh , the express on the right is not friendli .
it look complex .
it look like you've intertwin and mix thing togeth , right ?
but there is go to be a light at the end of the tunnel .
to start with , the sum of that form ar endem .
in mathemat , in the natur scienc , in engin , and in appli scienc , such sum ar call convolut and as you proce , progress through your mathemat educ , if you take a cours for exampl in transform method or you take a cours in let's sai mechan or physic , you'll find such sum crop up repeatedli .
the idea of a convolut term is on of those basic principl which captur essenti how we can stitch thing togeth and , in consequ thei occur repeatedli in scienc , and mathemat , and engin .
thei tend to be a huge import concept .
it's hard to overst how import thi basic oper is .
for our purpos , all that histori in the context is not so immedi relev , it's someth we just store awai in the back of our mind sai , okai , i've stumbl upon a convolut .
but for our purpos , it is simpli a manifest of addit .
the whole is equal to the sum of the part .
and i've got a particular express .
now it look complex , it look messi .
but let's keep our ey firmli on the prize , on the target .
we ar interest in f n .
the probabl that there's a first success run at trial n .
and we find f n appear on the right hand side of the equat .
let us isol it by move everyth els to the other side of the equat .
and write thi equival in the follow form .
f n is given by an express on the right now , start out with u n from which you subtract out probabl of the form f j time u n minu j .
okai , it hardli seem like we've made ani progress so i just re massag someth and rewrot it , but it's still a clumsi awkward look express .
can i do anyth with it ?
oh , but here is the kei point .
gain .
we ar interest in fn .
what do we see on the righthand side ?
well , we see variou valu for u .
u1 , u2 , u3 up to un .
we also see the valu f1 through fn minu <num> , and thi lead us to our next slogan .
if you know the sequenc of the u's , u1 , u2 , u3 , and so forth , and you know the first n minu <num> valu for the f , f<num> through fn minu <num> .
then you can comput the nth valu for the f .
thi is the begin of a recurs calcul which sai , well , mayb i can comput the f , step by step . first comput the first on .
if i know the first on i know the next on .
if i know the next on i know the next on after that .
and so on down like a chain of domino fall over .
so far so good .
but of cours thi seem that we have fought the problem off and made a more difficult problem .
what now can we sai about the u's .
okai , thi is our next step .
let us take stock .
we ar interest in comput the probabl of a success run of length <num> on or befor the n'th trial , s n .
we manag to reduc that to a question about the probabl of first success run .
f1 , f2 , <num> , f<num> through fn .
and we manag to fall that off to a question about comput the probabl of ani success run .
termin at a given point , sai n .
if it can comput un , for ani end , then it can comput the f's .
thi look even harder .
but an appeal to addit just on more time .
third time pai for all .
we'll settl it for us .
and at the heart of thi excursor's addit is a kei appeal onc more to the fact that we're deal with independ trial .
let's take a close look at what happen if we have success in the five trial termin at trial n .
if we have success at trial n minu <num> , n minu <num> , n minu <num> , n minu <num> , and n .
if you have five success .
consecut success .
then , it must be the case that in on of those five locat , there must be a success run which is termin .
eh , a pictur is worth a thousand word here .
so let's draw the possibl .
imagin a set where , from trial in minu <num> through n , we have a string of five consecut success five onc , and let's focu on that .
now , if thi is the case , then the first row of the pictur show you on possibl , that ye , you have five success there and it transpir that a success run of length five termin at the nth trial .
how could thi happen ?
well , you could have a failur at trial in minu <num> .
if that happen then you have a success run termin at trial n .
or thi could be a string of two consecut access run .
so you have on success run termin at n minu <num> .
and anoth success run immedi after it termin at n .
or it could be a string of three consecut success run termin at n .
all these case ar fold into the first row on your tabl .
and the probabl of that .
by fiat , by convent , is what we call us of n .
the probabl that there is a success run first or subsequ , termin at trial n .
here's on wai in which you could get five on in a row , from trial n minu <num> to trial n .
anoth possibl is that a success run termin at trial n minu <num> .
mean that you must have success from n minu <num> through n minu <num> follow by on more success which mai or mai not be the start of on more success run .
here's anoth wai of get five on in a row .
to get a success run which termin at trial n minu <num> , it must be the case that either there wa a failur at trial n minu <num> immedi preced it , or it wa on of two consecut success run , or on of three consecut success run and so on .
all these possibl ar captur in our notat .
in u n minu <num> .
and so we have a success run termin at trial n minu <num> , probabl is u n minu <num> .
and , is success to follow , shown in maroon ?
and that give you a probabl on half .
independ trial mean these two probabl must multipli .
the next possibl in the third row in the tabl sai that now we have a success run termin a trial , n minu <num> , follow by two success , which mai or mai not be the start of yet anoth success run .
and then anoth possibl where you have a success run termin at trial n minu <num> , and final , a success run termin at n minu <num> .
and a littl introspect convinc us that if we have five on in a row from trial n minu <num> , through , to trial n , then on of these five possibl must transpir .
there must be a success run termin somewher in the the of five .
and now , addit put everyth togeth .
the probabl of five on in a row from trial n minu <num> through trial n is on half time on half time on half time on half or <num> to the minu <num> .
thi is becaus the trial ar repeat and independ , and the coin is fair .
and now we stitch togeth the possibl .
the first row ha got probabl u n .
a success run termin at trial n , in which case you do get five on in a row .
or a success run termin at trial n minu <num> , probabl u n minu <num> , and you have on more success , which is u n minu <num> , time on half .
or a success run termin at trial n minu <num> , probabl is u n minu <num> , and then you have two success success .
and the probabl of that is <num> to the power minu <num> .
and we systemat stitch the piec togeth .
and these five piec ad togeth must give you the probabl of the event that you had five on in a row .
now thi is love .
i should mention that up to thi point a develop had been gener .
we could have replac coin toss by other experi where there were renew .
and , argument would have been essenti the same .
but thi is the first place where the essenti natur of the coin toss and the fact that thei're look at sequenc of success , run , come into plai .
right ?
so here's where we're us problem specif inform , as oppos to more gener analysi .
at the end of the dai i've got an equat which ha taken up a certain amount of real estat .
it look a littl complex .
what do we learn from it ?
let's keep our ey firmli on the prize here .
what's the kei thing we want to look at ?
we want to sai someth about un , the probabl that there is a success run , first or subsequ .
at trial n .
isol u n on the right hand side and move everyth to the other side .
and now we've got a new express , u n in term of other thing .
but a , a littl look at the right hand side tell us that we ar prime for yet on more slogan .
if i know the first n minu <num> valu , u<num> through un minu <num> , then i've got a pathwai to deduc the nth valu , un .
now , thi is veri pretti becaus thi sai if i know u1 , i can construct u2 .
if i know u1 and u2 , i can construct u3 .
if i know u1 , u2 , u3 , i can construct u4 and so on down .
here's a recurs pathwai to comput the probabl u n .
now everyth is in place .
now let's assembl and put everyth togeth .
let's take stock now .
rememb , we want to comput the probabl sn .
and we determin as our fist slogan that if we know the f's then we know the s' .
we punt the ball down field and said , well , to comput the fs .
if we know the u's then we can comput the f's .
and now to comput the u's we sai if know the earli valu of u then i can comput the later valu of u .
okai , now it's a question of simpli assembl .
there's noth particularli a defi about the assembl .
all right .
thi is algebra , and if we get the number togeth and see where thei go .
but at the end of the dai a beauti stori is go to emerg , like a butterfli from a chrysali .
so , bear with me , and we'll go step by step .
so , our first order of busi is to comput the probabl u n .
for everi valu of the index n , where u n repres the probabl that there is a success run of length five which is at trial n .
now , here's what we know as our boundari condit .
you cannot have a success run of length five termin in the first four trial , so u1 through u4 ar manifestli <num> .
what about u5 .
well we know what u5 is but let us test our formula and we've got a formula sit abov , abov us .
let's plug it in with n equal to <num> .
and if you plug in n equal to <num> we get an express on the right which is <num> to the power of minu <num> from which you subtract awai term involv u1 through u4 , but u1 through u4 ar all <num> .
thei all vanish quietli , like the snow of the yester year .
and what remain is simpli <num> to the power minu <num> .
what about u6 ?
plug in n equal to <num> .
and now we've got an express on the right , which is <num> to the power minu <num> .
from which you take awai variou term from u2 through u5 .
well , but u2 through u4 ar <num> , thei vanish , u5 as we've just discov is <num> to the power minu <num> .
in conson with an immedi and direct analysi .
and therefor u6 is <num> to the power minu <num> from which you take awai <num> to the power minu <num> and an elementari reassembl and factor show us that thi is exactli <num> to the power minu <num> .
there's onli about a on in <num> chanc that you get a success run occur on the sixth trial .
what about u7 ?
just on more , to , to fix idea .
put an n equal to <num> in there , work your wai through , the onli term that surviv on the right ar from u5 and u6 .
but we've alreadi cover these valu in the previou step and that's the essenc of a recurs argument , plug those in and we find u7 is also to the power minu <num> .
you might want to give thi a littl thought , why ar u6 and u7 both the same , is there someth wrong ?
if you think about it for a littl bit , you realiz that thi is a consequ of the fact that if there is a success run to occur at all , there can be onli up to on success run in the first nine trial .
and , therefor , u6 , u7 , and so forth up to u9 ar go to have to be the same .
now we can understand how to build thi forward .
from u7 , you go to u8 , from u8 you go to u9 .
of cours , do it by hand is tediou and not at all edifi but thi is the kind of task that a digit comput excel at .
we simpli write in on line of code , which sai comput thi recurs .
and you do it , and out come a tabl like thi .
i've given you the fraction here explicitli , to .
emphas two thing .
on , we're actual comput thi exactli , not to some dissimilar approxim .
we can actual get the exact ration valu for each of these probabl , but of cours a big fraction like u20 is hardli defin , right ?
so we'll , we'll eventu want to look at it in decim format to get a better idea of what's go on .
and we shall .
the other thing to note is that in the denomin , we have power of two .
and that's go to aris becaus we're deal repeatedli with a toss of a fair coin , and we're go to have product of on half .
okai .
thu far , thu good , so good .
what we've discov is a , a systemat recurs process by which we can comput all the valu un if we wish .
now we've got thi whole sequenc of valu of u when what's next ?
well , the next step is to go on and comput the first success run probabl .
that come next .
what's the next step in our book keep ?
so at thi point , we know in principl all the valu u sub n .
the next step of cours is to work backward and now comput the first success run probabl f n by our second equat .
and our slogan .
wa that if i know the u's in princip i can construct the f's .
let's start with the , the initi condit for the f .
we know that f1 , f2 , f3 and f4 ar all either <num> becaus there can no success run termin in the first four trial .
what about f5 ?
well , in our equat for fn , put in n equal to <num> .
and just write down what transpir .
on the right , we discov u5 , and term u1 through u4 .
but u1 through u4 ar <num> , as we can read off directli from the tabl .
and so thei have no contribut to be some , and we simpli have fu5 , and therefor f5 , the probabl of a first success run at trial <num> is <num> to the power minu <num> .
let's do a coupl more just to make sure we're get the , the flow of the calcul under our belt .
put in n equal to <num> we have f<num> .
f6 devolv upon u6 as well as u1 through u5 .
but u1 through u4 ar <num> , the onli contribut ar from u5 and u6 .
but u5 contribut noth too becaus it is in conjunct with f1 which is <num> .
and therefor you onli get u6 .
and u<num> is <num> to the power minu <num> .
as we read from the tabl and so we now we got f6 , f<num> , likewis , put in n equal to <num> .
and again we notic , on the right , term f1 through f4 contribut noth .
term u1 through u4 contribut noth .
and , therefor , the onli contribut on the right is from u7 .
and so we get f7 to be a gain <num> to the minu <num> and now we can systemat build up these f valu as we sai in our tabl .
again notic that we get variou fraction , these ar exact .
we have power of two in the denomin but of cours thei're get ugli and the fraction themselv don't give us much of a feel for how the probabl ar behav .
there is veri littl identif in see on larg number divid by anoth larg number .
our institut isn't built along those line .
but we will look at it in a simpler decim form just as soon as we got everyth under our belt .
so where ar we ?
we've now comput , in principl , the tabl of u's .
we've comput the tabl of f's .
these repres probabl of success run termin for the first time or at subsequ time at trial n .
what next ?
well , of cours we're interest in the probabl of a success run on or befor trial n .
in other word , we want to comput sn .
but sn is determin complet by our slope here , by the valu of the first success run probabl , the f's .
and therefor , sinc we know the f's , we , in principl , know the s's .
let's start .
well , we have the initi condit , around three condit , s1 , s2 , s3 , and s4 ar all <num> .
what if n is equal to <num> ?
well s5 is the sum of f1 through f5 , but f1 through f4 contribut noth and therefor we simpli get a <num> or <num> to the power minu <num> .
s6 give you the sum of f's , f1 through f6 .
the onli contribut ar from f5 and f6 .
and that give us <num> time <num> to the power of minu <num> .
on more for saniti , s7 is the sum of f1 through f7 .
the onli contribut ar from f5 , f6 and f7 , put it all togeth and we get <num> in <num> , interest , the probabl ar increas .
and perhap even unexpectedli fast .
let's see what the number come out to be .
so , just imagin plug it into your comput , and just gener on valu after the other .
here ar the first <num> valu for sn , s1 through s4 ar <num> , s5 is <num> in <num> , s7 is <num> in <num> , and then we have a bunch of fraction , right , of cours , the fraction ar not undefin .
so let's promptli look at them again in a decim form .
and in thi time , let's look at a tabl of s valu , where n rang from multipl of <num> <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and <num> .
and here ar the probabl for each of those valu of n of observ a success run of length five at or befor that valu of n .
so , s10 is about <num> .
it is actual not unlik at all that even in ten toss , you'll get some run of length five .
it'll happen on in ten time , approxim .
s20 is alreadi about <num> .
thi is get seriou .
thi is not at all unexpect .
if somebodi sai thei threw , toss a coin <num> time , and somewher in that sequenc thei found a success run of length five , the chanc of thi is almost on in four .
s30 , the chanc ar better than on in three .
s40 , the chanc ar almost on in two .
and s100 the chanc ar about <num> .
of cours thi is what we'd elud to in our first tableau in our introductori tableau .
when we're talk about the amaz and non intuit aspect of fluctuat , the chanc of a success run of a given length , in thi case , five , is not at all trivial .
at s100 we have a resplend <num> or slightli more than <num> chanc , of , in a <num> time is find a success run of length five or more in between .
if you think back to those sequenc , on random , on artifici , you realiz where the sourc of the confus wa in our intuit .
immedi , we have a slogan .
and , to put it succinctli , it is not at all unlik to see a success run of length five in even a moder small sequenc of coin toss .
thi alreadi begin to answer the fundament question we rais about a basketbal player and two oppos hypothes .
but befor we come to it it will be wise to step back .
we've work veri hard on thi on .
take a look at the framework as a whole and see whether we can discern pattern , extens , gener .
after all , we work realli hard on thi .
we should get some valu for it , some fruit that's other than just we've solv onli on problem .
hopefulli come back and take a look at the issu of the cours end .
so let's take a look at the set we have so far .
how did we attempt thi problem ?
a listen can be forgiven for feel that thi is oppress , thi wa difficult , there were lot of move part and it wa not clear where thei came from .
and at the end , someth magic seem to have happen .
but let's take a look at it piec by piec and deconstruct what we have done .
we were interest in the chanc of a success run occur somewher in sequenc event toss .
the first , and natur , step wa to seek a partit to break it up into smaller piec .
and the natur partit wa to break it up in term of the first success run event .
so , mayb that wasn't too bad , though assuredli , if someon without a background in thi , without prepar , had been thrown to wolv as awar were , given thi problem .
it might have been hard to unearth that particular wai of break up the problem .
but you will agre with me , that at ani rate , onc point out , it is clear that thi is an elementari and perhap even natur , mayb even inevit wai of break up the problem .
well , that wa our first equat .
the second equat wa a littl more complex .
we now had an issu of try to comput the probabl f n , and we relat it to the probabl u n , the probabl of the first or subsequ success run termin at trial n .
and it's not clear where thi line of thought came from .
if we deconstruct and look at the , the , what we have done , have the advantag of have done it , it is clear that what we were try to do wa understand success run termin at a certain point .
and onc we start think along those line , we found we could break thing up natur , base upon where the first success run termin .
and that led to an addit principl , and that addit principl led to a convolut , that express in the middl .
okai .
now , so far so good .
in itself , it is not daunt .
onc you explain the princip , you sai , i get it .
i can see how thi work .
but again , extract the princip from first princip without advanc train could be veri difficult .
that train of logic can be veri slipperi .
but what i would like to commun to you is that even though the initi step might have been hard to find , onc it wa point out , the execut wa elementari .
it just requir addit .
now , these two step , as i told you , ar gener .
noth in these step realli demand that we were toss a coin .
thei could be do ani other experi which involv repeat independ trial of the experi with some event which constitut renew .
and if we had ani such set then the first two equat will carri through in total , without chang .
where doe the particular flavor of the coin toss experi come into plai ?
ah ha .
it is in the third equat , and it is here that we util what we knew about coin toss .
what wa the logic behind thi ?
in mani wai thi wa the most slipperi of the three piec .
the principl wa veri hard to find , becaus there were so mani thing which we could have thought of do , which lead us into dead end .
and what unlock the logic door here wa an appreci that we're deal with a run of five success .
and if we look at a particular run of five success , from trial n through the preced trial n minu <num> befor it .
then the understand aros that you can't have such a run of success without a success run termin at on of those five locat .
admittedli , when i have to sai someth like thi , thi look like stoni ground .
until that last observ hit me .
and then i realiz , that's an epiphani .
i've got , now , a recurs .
admittedli , thi is logic realli difficult .
and i would not be abl to blame anybodi if thei'd been unabl to unearth that particular logic string which led to that equat .
but the moment it is point out to you , then assembl the equat after the fact is not hard at all .
it is addit onc more .
beauti , nuanc , subtl .
now at the end of the dai , i have three equat .
all of them just requir an elementari us of addit .
never confus the word elementari with easi .
elementari here just mean you don't need ani fanci tool .
you don't need ani big electron widget .
you just need veri basic principl .
the difficulti here is not in the fact that the technic demand ar veri high .
but , that the logic is veri slipperi .
and it take time , effort , and mayb a touch of geniu to extract the right approach .
but onc you have the right approach , execut it requir noth fanci whatsoev .
it is simpli just the whole is equal to the sum of the part , repeatedli .
now , thi long put orat is perhap us for a reader , for a listen , to not feel oppress by the fact that thi wa so hard .
the piec were hard to discov , but onc we understand what the kei logic wa , then it's , it is easi to assembl .
have put thi much work in , we should see if we can extract a littl more juic from thi appar stoni stone , right ?
how could we extend thi idea ?
well we could go in two direct .
we look at success run of length <num> .
natur enough , we would like to sai someth about arbitrari success run .
sai success run of length r .
where r could be <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so on .
well , what chang here ?
on the first two line , you remain intact .
thei carri through in total .
not , in nowher the logic in those first two equat did we exploit the fact that the coin wa fair , or that we were deal with coin at all , actual .
the fair of the coin aris in the third equat , and it aris in the power of <num> , <num> to the power minu <num> , on half time on half time on half time on half time on half , five success success in coin toss .
<num> to the minu <num> , <num> to the minu <num> , <num> to the minu <num> , <num> to the minu <num> .
here's where the fair coin wa us , and here's where the number of success wa relev .
<num> to the power of minu <num> , we were deal with five success , success run of length <num> .
well what happen if we replac success run of length <num> by success run of length r , for some gener posit integ r ?
everyth carri through in total , with the replac of <num> to the power minu <num> by <num> to the power minu r , and now we're go to look at the block of r success , run from n through the r minu on trial befor it .
and then break it down exactli the same wai .
but now we have a new equat with <num> replac by r .
oh , that wa easi .
what if the coin were not fair ?
well , where doe the fair of the coin come in ?
well , it come in , in the power of <num> .
so , but it's for on half if you have a bias or bent coin whose success probabl is p , for some p .
then , on half get replac by p , <num> to the power minu <num> get replac by p , <num> to the power minu <num> get replac by p squar , <num> to the power minu <num> by p cube , and so on .
and now we've got a new equat .
everyth carri through in total from thi point on .
and so , from here , you can comput for a given p and a given r .
all the valu u .
from the u valu we can comput all the valu f .
from the f valu we can comput all the valu s .
and you'll now notic we've got a gener overarch princip .
and now a princip that ha got more util than the simpl , control , limit problem that we start with .
so let's begin by condit on the first step , on the first trial .
you recal w stand for the event you win eventu at crap .
w sub n stand on the event that you win on the nth trial .
and fk stand for the event that you throw a number k on the first trial .
the , the event f2 , f3 through f12 partit the space .
and while immedi appeal to total probabl , to addit , we can write down , we can decompos the probabl of win .
by condit on the probabl of win , have thrown k on the first trial .
veri good , so far so good .
now the question is , is thi decomposit help ?
inde it is .
what have we given in thi experi ?
let's , let's paus and take a look .
we're told that we will throw a number k with a probabl pk list on the left of your tabl .
so we know the number p2 , p3 , p4 through p12 .
what els do we know ?
well , we know certain condit probabl .
we ar given , that if we throw <num> or <num> , you win immedi .
therefor , the condit properti of win , have thrown a <num> , is <num> .
and the condit probabl of win , have thrown an <num> is also <num> .
and we're told that we'll lose immedi if you throw a <num> or a <num> or a <num> .
the condit probabl of win is these case is ident zero .
you can not possibl win , in fact you've lost .
if you've thrown <num> , <num> or <num> on the first trial .
now we can fold thi into a total probabl equat .
and the , the term correspond to k equal to <num> , <num> and <num> will vanish quietli like the snow of yesteryear .
thei contribut noth to the sum .
becaus the condit probabl in those instanc is addit zero .
the condit probabl in the case k equal to <num> to <num> contribut exactli <num> .
and therefor , our sum simplifi to p7 plu p11 plu now is sum over the residu term k run .
between four , five , six , eight , nine or ten .
okai .
so that mean now we now have a condit probabl to evalu in those residu case .
let's move on directli and see how we can go ahead and do thi .
now here is where our second effort come to mind .
so here is what we need to do .
we have to determin for the case four , five , six , eight , nine or ten .
what ar the condit probabl of win have thrown on of these number .
recal that in such a set , the game progress by throw the dice repeatedli .
until you will win , if the origin number wa thrown .
now in such a case , it is now natur to appeal to addit on more time and break down the chanc of win .
by the chanc of win on a design trial .
if you win at all , you're go to win on the first trial or the second trial or the third trial and so forth .
in other word , the event w is the union of the event w1 , w2 , w3 and so on ad infinitum .
and still perhap , we can drive down the probabl of w given fk , where k is on of four , five , six , eight , nine or ten .
as the probabl of the union of event w sub n , given that fk ha occur , given that k wa thrown on the first trial .
what you've done is simpli appeal to addit and decompos the event that you win into the piec that you win on given trial .
but the event wn , w1 , w2 , w3 and so forth , ar clearli mutual exclus .
thei ar disjoint .
if you win at all , you mai , might win on the third trial .
but in that case , you haven't won on the fifth trial .
these ar disjoint on mutual exclus event .
and addit immedi right to the rescu .
and so , the probabl of union is the sum of the condit probabl .
on more step is given to us by the start condit .
here and there , we're interest in the special case , where we throw four , five , six , eight , nine or ten on the first throw .
but if you threw four , five , six , eight , nine or ten on the first throw , then we know that the game proce .
it doe not termin .
you're go to have to make at least on more row .
in other word , for these valu for k , the chanc of win on the first throw is ident zero .
the probabl of w1 given fk , for k , four , five , six , eight , nine , or ten , is zero .
and therefor , the first term in the sum disappear and the sum simplifi ever so slightli .
it will sum for integ n , rang from the second trial of the condit probabl of wn given fk .
all right , we've reduc the problem further .
so now the condit probabl that we need to comput , ar obtain as a sum of condit probabl .
and so the final piec of the puzzl now is for us to evalu the condit probabl of win on the init trial .
when you have thrown k on the first trial .
and thei're interest in particular for the case where k is four , five , six , eight , nine or ten .
where the trial will continu after the first trial .
we put a lot of hard work into thi .
in analyz a pro basketbal player's repeat shot at a basket .
if he had known that we were go to go through thi much troubl , he would have probabl pack it up earlier and gone home , right .
but now let's go back and see what thi sai about the basi of our statist test and the hot hand phenomenon .
rememb , the idea of the test wa that we were go to compar the observ sequenc of attempt at a basket with a statist version of a sequenc of coin toss .
our slogan , the more like it is that a success run of a given length is observ in a sequenc of coin toss , the less the reason to believ in a mysteri and strang hot hand .
and what is the conclus ?
the quot is from a classic book by daniel kahneman , where he sai the hot hand theori is a widespread cognit illus affect all behold , fan , player , and coach .
now , thi wa base upon an analysi which came out in <num> , by three author , gilovich at harvard univers , vallon and tverski at stanford , where thei analyz an entir season of the nation basketbal associ's data , look at individu player through the whole season .
and their conclus , the hot hand theori is a mirag .
surpris ?
but that is what the evid tell us .
the three applic we've look at were hefti .
but thei were inform , thei were beguil .
thei gave us inform that wa not readili appar to us .
and the best mathemat theori do that .
thei will take structur , formal them , provid predict which run counter to intuit , which surpris , shock , amaz , beguil .
now , the analysi wa far from trivial .
it wa elementari for all three exampl , but not at all easi .
but if a student goe back and take a look at what we did and how we did it , she will find that we us two tool of the trade repeatedli , two elementari principl .
first and foremost , addit , the whole is equal to the sum of the individu part .
thi principl is , clearli sound veri natur and reason .
but it sound lightweight .
but after these exampl , perhap our student will agre with me that thei ar far from lightweight .
thi principl is deep , subtl , and nuanc .
at it heart , addit is about find creativ wai of break up a problem into individu piec which ar easi to digest .
of cours , there is no absolut wai of do thi .
everi problem ha got it own intern logic , and so you have to sift through a problem , think about it , analyz it , befor you perhap stumbl upon the right wai to look at it .
but onc you do , the problem tend to fall into your lap .
it open up like a , a flower bud open in the sun .
now , the second kei element wa thi idea of independ , and in particular , the context of repeat independ trial .
the moment on ha repeat independ trial , at it heart , independ is a rule of product .
repeat independ trial make the product transpar .
we almost don't have to worri about the probabl measur .
i know that's blasphemi , but we almost don't have to .
all we need to do is take the probabl and multipli them .
but we have to be assur that the event at hand ar devolv upon non overlap set of independ trial .
and the moment that happen , everyth is independ , and you're done .
we put these two principl to work in three beauti and surpris context .
the first wa in gambl .
and we pick a casino game , the game of crap , to analyz it .
we had start out in our , in our second tableau by look at the game of crap and look at the first throw and deduc that on the first throw , on wa twice as like to win as to lose , which would lead an unwari gambler to think , well , thi is a good game to plai .
but an accur analysi , take into account all the possibl , show us that the odd of win at crap ar actual just a shade less than on half .
as casino game go , thi is not a bad game .
the odd ar not dramat far from on half .
for exampl , in certain slot machin game , the odd could be onli <num> in favor .
<num> is in extra for the hous .
but here , the odd ar veri close to on half .
but thei ar , and thi is the critic point , the odd ar strictli less than on half .
thi explain in part the arcan and strang rule of the game .
the game's principl were design in such a wai as to provid a gambler with an incent to gambl by give them odd near on half , but make sure that the hous ha an edg .
the odd actual of win ar strictli less than a half , and if the gambler plai long enough , he is go to lose hi shirt .
our second exampl went into thi sublim and beauti idea of genet .
the darwinian idea of natur select , with herit characterist pass on through our gene .
and we look at the context of gene which ar accident artifact of the evolutionari process , gene which ar both recess and lethal .
for exampl , sickl cell anemia or the tai sach diseas .
and we queri whether on could sai someth about how the lethal gene dissolv or devolv over time , through gener .
and our find were that the lethal gene doe disappear from the popul across the gener .
of cours , the analysi wa sanit , but it again carri at it heart us and fundament inform .
the lethal gene doe disappear from the popul at larg , but painfulli slowli .
in mani case , the natur select process will take lot of time .
here's an exampl of how a lot of time is need .
of cours , we could do more than just sai thi qualit , we actual had quantit prescript .
the rate of decai wa like the harmon seri .
our third exampl wa , went back to thi issu in sport psycholog , the issu of the hot hand .
and now we come back full circl to our origin question , the basketbal player who hit mani basket in a row .
in mani wai , thi wa the hardest of the analys we have done so far .
thi requir intens and sustain logic endeavor .
it requir persist .
and as we recal , it wa done in a three stage process .
break up the problem into a smaller piec , break that up into a differ piec , and break that up final into a piec for which we have an answer .
not at all easi , but again , bear in mind that the tool we us were complet elementari .
the difficulti wa in the intrins logic complex of the problem .
and unearth the right attack wa where all the effort went .
and have done all of , of that work , sure , there wa a lot of algebra .
thi is the kind of thing that is hardli edifi , hardli interest for most peopl .
but at the end of all of that , we obtain a concret prescript and a concret result .
and on of the conclus is that a naiv appeal to a mysteri hot hand is probabl unwis .
to repeat william feller's exalt , even strong faith must be fortifi by a statist test .
and when on doe a principl statist test on someth like the hot hand , we run into these issu of the strang behavior fluctuat .
and out of these come a complet unexpect , a result in a complet new and unanticip direct .
and which , among other thing , take credenc awai from these mysteri phenomena that we appeal to so instinct .
thi conclud our long discuss of the interplai of independ and addit in problem of chanc in the world around us .
i hope you've been partli titil , partli entic by these exampl .
but now we should step back and sai , i now understand where independ plai a role in probabl , why it is so central .
where doe it lead to next ?
quo vadi ?
and so , in our next tableau , in tableau ten , we'll come back with independ at the heart of a fundament applic in the modern dai , that of poll .
and we'll start with poll .
and i will make the argument that a poll is a ridicul object .
it ha no busi work .
but somehow it appear to .
why ?
we will articul from thi begin the idea of where independ plai a role .
and out of these , we'll find emerg two of the three fundament distribut in all of the theori of chanc , the binomi distribut and the poisson distribut .
and our explor will take us from poll to bomb and queue .
and the distribut of star in the univers .
thi is come up in tableau ten .
and final , we ar now in a place where we can exploit the fact that trial ar independ .
to come to a right understand of the structur , let's take a simpl test case .
suppos , for definit , that we threw <num> on the first trial .
and that's where you won on the tenth trial .
so if you won the tenth trial and we threw <num> in the first trial , then here's a kind of pictur that might emerg .
trial ar run from left to right , on through <num> .
<num> is what we threw on the first trial , and then there ar trial <num> through <num> .
follow by trial <num> and sens i'm told that we're win .
trial <num> is a <num> .
what about the trial <num> through <num> .
there ar exactli <num> minu the book end trial .
<num> minu <num> trial in question in the middl .
sandwich between the start and the finish .
<num>'s <num> minu <num> or <num> trial .
we get a success of number .
and all we know is that these number can anyth what so ever except <num> becaus if ani of them were <num> , we , we would have won earlier .
or <num> , if ani of them were <num> you would lose the game immedi .
and so all the interven number , <num> minu <num> of them have to be ani number except <num> or <num> .
what is the probabl of the chanc of such an outcom for thi conjoint experi ?
all right , let's take a look at thi .
the kei idea here .
is on , addit , and two , independ .
let's take a look anew at the sequenc .
for ani of the interven trial , from <num> through <num> , we can get ani result whatsoev except <num> or <num> .
by addit , the probabl of obtain ani of those taint number shown there is <num> minu the sum of p <num> and p <num> .
in other word , the probabl of ani of those interven number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so on .
is <num> minu p6 minu p7 .
recal that we know p6 and p7 from the tabl on the left .
veri well , thi is for on interven trial .
given that the first trial is a <num> shown shade in the pictur .
what can we now sai about the conjoint trial <num> through <num> follow by <num> ?
well we know the last trial ha to be a <num> becaus we're win on the tenth trial .
and so the probabl of that is p6 .
we know the probabl of each of the outcom shown in the interven trial is <num> minu p6 minu p7 .
the trial ar independ and therefor we simpli multipli the probabl .
there ar <num> minu <num> , or <num> , interven case , each with probabl <num> minu b6 minu b7 , and a final trial yield a <num> with probabl p<num> .
we simpli multipli all of them out .
and thei get <num> minu p6 minu p7 to the power <num> time p6 .
thi is the probabl of the sequenc of trial <num> through <num> in the pictur .
and thi case now show us what a gener pictur is go to be like .
we veri quickli gener .
pick ani k between <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> .
pick ani end , two or larger .
now , we got a string of trial .
k is the first trial .
k is the last trial if you're go to win on the nth trial .
and now , there ar n minu <num> trial in the middl with the book end trial around .
the n minu <num> trial can be neither k nor <num> and therefor the probabl of each of those , the atom probabl is <num> minu pk minu p7 , there ar n minu <num> of those follow by a final trial which result in k , total all togeth .
the probabl of win on the nth trial given that k wa a sum of the first trial , where k here is <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> and n is ani number bigger than <num> , is obtain by multipli <num> minu pk minu p7 .
n minu <num> time , on for each of the interven trial and final multipli all of that by pk to return to the origin trial and win the game and now we've got all the condit probabl at hand .
also over by the shout , ye there's a littl bit of technic assembl left over but it's not veri much .
let's put it all togeth .
so , let's begin by write down the progress .
the probabl of win , given that on of the design number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> , happen to the first trial , is given by a sum from the second trial onward of condit probabl .
and that we've seen is given by , thi form which is evoc .
power of <num> minu pk minu p7 .
multipli by a pk .
now , the pk at the end is of littl matter .
it doe not depend upon anyth come out of the sum .
what about the thing in the middl ?
well , thei ar .
it's a sum of power .
the sum start at n equal to <num> but the power is n minu <num> so the first power is <num> minu <num> or <num> .
the next power is <num> minu <num> or <num> .
the next step power is <num> minu <num> or <num> .
in other word what you got just write out the sum is pk .
time <num> , power <num> give you <num> .
power <num> , power <num> , power <num> , and so on , add infin .
now thi look complex , but it's actual began realli simpl .
what we've got is a sum of integ power .
that look familiar in fact we recogn that thi is exactli a geometr seri , an old friend .
look all that if x is ani real number between minu <num> and plu <num> .
and if we sum the power of x , <num> plu x plu x squar plu x cube and so forth , then thi entir seri is call a geometr seri , and it sum to a veri simpl express .
it sum to the reciproc of <num> minu x .
we've got a geometr seri right here insid the squar bracket .
identifi the geometr term x with the term on minu pk minu p7 .
and then plug in the geometr seri formula and get pk time the reciproc of <num> minu , <num> minu pk minu p7 .
a littl assembl .
and it simplifi to a beauti and delic express .
we realli couldn't have ask for a simpler express .
the probabl of win eventu , given that we've thrown on of the number <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> or <num> .
given a number in k's rang .
is given by pk divid by pk plu p7 .
now thi is satisfactori , it's a complet and comprehens answer for the question but , befor we jump forward , we should paus and take a good hard look at what we've written down .
see if it inform a problem , doe it tell us someth ?
an answer as simpl as that should have , must have a direct pathwai to it .
if we take a look at thi we sai well , what kind of sequenc ar we look at ?
we threw a k , and we end .
either with a k or a <num> .
noth in the middl is relev and therefor if you're go to onli look at an alphabet of k or <num> , the chanc of get k is pk over pk plu p7 .
veri intuit .
veri just .
but veri correct .
now , let's put everyth togeth .
as i said , all of , uh , other shout .
so , where the condit probabl for the case at hand .
let's reassembl the probabl of win by appeal to total probabl .
elimin the case <num> , <num> and <num> where we lose the first trial , we've got a simpl express .
and now let us plug in for the ten in the condit of probabl .
and we've got now the follow express .
recal the pk squar numer rise becaus the condit probabl is pk over pk plu b7 .
and it will multipli by pk which repres the probabl of throw k on the first trial .
so you're go to k of the first trial , a k of the last trial , that give you a pk squar .
it's a simpl express , and all these number appear in the tabl in your left .
which simpli read them off , and write them down , and do a numer evalu .
now , let's proce .
we can simplifi thi a littl bit by observ that probabl appear in pair .
p2 and p12 ar the same .
p3 and p11 ar the same , p4 and p10 ar the same , and so on .
so these probabl appear in pair .
and by group these probabl , we find <num> and <num> , thi is p7 , <num> and <num> , thi is p11 .
and then for p4 is doubl in .
p10 , p5 is doubl in p9 , and p6 is doubl in p8 , so you get twice , <num> over <num> time the express in the long bracket .
okai , and it's a simpl fraction , we can simplifi it .
at thi point we've exhaust all the probabl intuit .
we should paus befor we do anyth further .
to take stock what we've done .
thi is elementari , but there is some subtleti here .
there were two appeal to addit , took partit to space .
the first appeal by what happen in the first step .
the second appeal to addit by partit base on the number of trial in the experi .
and there wa an appeal to independ , which said that individu probabl were obtain by simpli multipli atom probabl for the individu trial .
onc you've got all of thi , you've got a numer answer , but of cours we don't want to leav it like thi .
we should comput it , and we do .
we'll find here , there is a fraction .
of cours , we should evalu the fraction becaus by itself it doesn't sai veri much to us .
and we find , hm , thi is interest .
the answer is . <num> recur .
now thi is interest .
now numer it's just a number .
it's a probabl of chanc .
but let's take stock of what thi is sai about the experi itself .
rememb thi is a gambl game .
you've gone to the casino to gambl at crap .
you've thrown dice and eventu you win or lose .
now , thi tell you that win at crap is almost a fair coin flip .
it's almost a <num> <num> proposit .
that's interest .
but here's a rub .
it's almost a <num> <num> proposit , but in fact , it is bias awai from on half , below on half .
thi explain , in part , why the rule of the game ar so peculiar , so arcad , there's someth magic about the wai the rule were design .
thei were design to get a chanc , near on half .
to tempt the unwari gambler into plai more becaus clearli in a game which is acut unfavor to you well you've plai onc , twice you find you're lose all the time you won't plai if again .
but , if you win almost half the time you might feel , ha i could , i can make a kill here if i'm just lucki .
thi temp a gambler to plai the game .
but , and here's the rub , the odd ar bias against you , albeit by a small amount .
but thei ar bias against you .
in a long run of game of crap , you will lose your shirt .
okai , thi again explain why the game's design the wai it is .
it is to make it interest to plai while guarante a built in edg for the casino , for the hous .
now in other gambl game the hous get an edg , by simpli charg an commiss per game .
but in thi game the edg is bake into the game itself .
thi is a polit ag and again , we should come up with a moral , a slogan , a summari .
and here it is .
our slogan ; don't gambl .
the other gui alwai know more than you do .
our next applic is drawn from the sphere of genet .
i alwai find , when tackl a new subject , that the histori , the context is inform , frequent illumin .
and if you'll indulg me , i will begin with a preambl take you back in time to the pivot moment when the scienc took off .
thi wa in the year <num> , and the book in question , of cours , wa charl darwin's , the origin of speci by mean of natur select .
now , thi wa a revolutionari volum , an incendiari volum , an epoch volum .
to understand why thi book had such a larg impact , wa so divis earli on , we need to understand the context of that time .
now through record histori , our tradit , our religi custom , had held that event in human histori were shape cataclysm , from the format of the earth , to the origin of speci .
that these happen in rel short period of time , by violent cataclysm thing like flood , bolt of lightn .
now , around the earli part of the 19th centuri , these question were drawn into some doubt among a few thinker .
and , thi wa brought to a head by the public , in <num> , of the first volum of three , of the geologist , sir charl lyell , a scottish geologist who publish a book on the principl of geologi .
lyell held that far from the earth be creat by cataclysm event like flood and so forth , that in fact , the evid on the ground suggest that the format wa much more gradual , much more by a long period of accret of small event .
thi is a posit we now call uniformitarian .
and lyell's idea wa that thing like eros , wind , water , over veri long time span , ultim result in the massiv chang on the earth's topographi we see todai , the grand canyon , mount everest , and so forth .
now , thi wa quit contrari to common understand , our tradit of format .
thi volum had been extent for about <num> year when a young charl darwin went out on a voyag around the world on hm beagl , and the captain of the ship gave him lyell's first volum .
to put it mildli , darwin wa enraptur by the gloriou sweep of the idea that lyell laid forth .
there ar a coupl of icon imag of darwin , on taken in <num> , at ag seven .
you can see that there's a bud botanist and naturalist , all todai , and you see hold a pot plant .
the second imag , perhap more familiar to student and reader , is that of a brood darwin .
thi is about nine year after the public of origin of speci .
you could sai the distant look in hi ey , a measur of sad , becaus the theori he promulg were highli controversi , caus no end of dissent .
perhap peer past what is the pervial of mortal man .
now , what did darwin postul ?
in a nutshel , darwin postul a uniformitarian theori for the propag of speci .
and like lyell , he suggest a mechan where speci propag by pass on hereditari inform from a parent gener to a filial gener , and so forth .
that , in so do , thei compet with other speci .
the winner surviv , the loser fade out .
qualiti that ar found to be us ar preserv , and qualiti that ar found to be detriment or ar harm , eventu vanish .
and he postul all of thi base upon empir evid that he'd gather on two long sea voyag .
now , the idea immedi had two strong oppos point .
first , the win evolut requir a veri long time scale , and thi run promptli against religi tradit , for instanc , which depend on the part of the world on is in , postul that the origin of the world ar from a few thousand year to mayb ten of thousand of year , and sometim a hundr thousand year , much too littl for darwinian evolut .
the second wa that darwin did not have a clue as to what thi hereditari mechan might be , propos a theori like thi .
in the face of the tradit , in the face of opposit , would requir great chutzpah , great cheeki at minimum , but darwin propos it .
now , the first of the object that the theori requir a veri long time span , origin had a setback .
thermal dynam calcul by lord kelvin , base on assum a cool world , a cool earth , suggest that the earth could not possibl be more than about <num> , <num> year .
and later revis to hi calcul led lord kelvin to conclud that perhap the earth wa not as old as <num> , <num> year , much too littl for the kind of timespan that darwin need .
thi wa eventu overturn at the turn of the centuri , by the discoveri of radioact emiss by rutherford .
a brand new energi sourc ha now been discov and now modern estim put the ag of the earth at about <num> billion year , more than ampl time for the kind of evolut that darwin had in mind .
the second object that the mechan wa obscur need the advanc in look at biolog object under a microscop at veri high magnif , to start understand the biochemistri of these object , requir the understand of , that we ultim now call , a genet structur for life .
of cours , todai , we understand that gene ar the method by which hereditari characterist ar pass on from gener to gener .
the entir set of featur that describ a live organ .
for instanc , in homosapien , the ey color , the shape of the face , skin color , the oppos thumb , and so on and so forth , ar all encod in the human genom .
so now , let's take a step back and take a look at thi mechan .
todai , we understand that gene ar the carrier of hereditari inform .
for our purpos todai , we must understand that the biochem mechan , which replic and pass on gene , is not perfect .
mutat and other chang can creep in .
and so , a gene mai ultim be express in on or more form .
and these variat on the theme of the gene ar call allel .
so , for exampl , in ey color , on ha a gene variat which trigger brown color and on which trigger the color blue .
now , in diploid organ , and thi is what most higher life form ar , includ us , gene alwai exist in pair call genotyp .
these genotyp exist at particular loci on a chromosom and the long string which make up the genom , which describ us .
now , the genotyp , depend upon whether the gene type ar the same or differ , ar classifi as homozyg , mean that the two allel ar the same , or heterozyg , that is , the allel in the pair ar differ .
thi turn out to be critic in determin characterist that emerg and ar pass on .
let us immedi focu on a set where a particular gene ha two variant , two allel .
so let's sai we call the allel cleverli , uppercas a and lowercas a .
the set we ar go to be interest in is the on where uppercas a is the domin allel .
what it mean is the follow , the genotyp that ar form by pair up these allel ar three in number , uppercas a and uppercas a togeth , and uppercas a and a lowercas a .
the order doe not matter .
sai , could , we could just sai , as well , sai lowercas a , uppercas a is the same thing , and two lowercas a allel .
in the case of ey color , the brown gene , upper case a , is domin .
and what that mean is that an individu with genotyp , with two uppercas as ha brown ey .
it also mean that an individu with a heterozyg genotyp , with an uppercas a and a lowercas a , also ha brown ey , but thi individu is a carrier .
thei contain the blue ey color within their genotyp , and thei can pass it on to their progeni .
individu with two lowercas a in their genotyp will then have blue ey .
we will sai the blue color is recess .
now , thi is a pretti harmless variant .
but occasion , the recess gene is not nearli so harmless and can lead to a fatal diseas .
an exampl is that of sickl cell anemia .
the detail ar not import of the biochemistri .
and the pictur i've shown you on the screen is just to illustr that we now understand the mechan by which a genet element , a gene , is modifi to creat a variant .
in thi case , a mutant variant which lead to a diseas , sickl cell anemia .
the second pictur on your right , deal with the diseas call tai sach .
it's a neurodegen diseas , and it chang occur in a particular locat of the chromosom , at chromosom <num> .
and again , the detail ar not import for our purpos , no less becaus the detail of the biochemistri ar now hit about my limit of my knowledg of the subject .
but , befor we go on , it'll be good to see how such mutat lead to microscop chang which affect the individu .
on your left , you'll see a visual of sickl cell anemia , which is a blood cell diseas .
normal red blood cell ar disk shape .
thei're like , look like donut .
thei ar the carrier of oxygen .
thei tumbl freeli through your blood vessel , becaus thei ar shape like thi , thei go tock , tock , tock , tock , tock , rattl right through .
but the mutant variat , which lead to sickl cell anemia , leav you blood cell which look like sickl , or crescent .
the difficulti here is two fold .
on , the absorpt area avail to a cell which is in the form of a sickl is much less , and therefor , it oxygen carri capac is significantli decreas .
and further , these crescent can hook up to caus chain .
and these chain can caus clot , with possibl fatal consequ to the organ .
on your right , you'll see the consequ , or visual of tai sach diseas , is the degen neural diseas which caus a degener of neural tissu and ultim , a breakdown of the organ .
so thi is the set that we have in mind .
a gene , which appear , let's sai , in two variant , two allel , on of which is domin , we'll call that cap a , uppercas a , on of which is recess and lethal , lowercas a .
our interest is in how such gene evolv and propag through the gener .
so let us take stock .
we're deal with express of a particular gene , which exist in two allel , two form .
uppercas a , which is domin , and lowercas a , which is recess and lethal .
the correspond genotyp ar three in number .
the normal homozyg , compris of two uppercas as , the heterozyg , carrier , an uppercas a and a lowercas a , and the sadli diseas individu , two lowercas as .
let us sai that in the mate popul , in the gener popul at larg , that these individu ar in the proport , u to 2v to w .
u repres that fraction of the populu whose genotyp is normal and homozyg .
in other word , two upper case as .
twice v repres that proport of a popul which is heterozyg .
in other word , an upper case a and a lower case a gene in the genotyp , and w repres the sick individu , the individu which have two lower case as in their genotyp .
so for instanc , if <num> of the popul is normal and homozyg , <num> of the popul is heterozyg , and <num> of the popul is diseas , then u will be <num> , twice v will be <num> , and w will be <num> .
why twice v ?
you ask .
pure for algebra conveni .
it's go to turn out that as we do the calcul we ar go to eventu get a strai factor to the denomin , and it'll be nice to cancel it out and give us a nice clean compact answer .
we could just as well have left it as v instead , and then we'd have had to carri the two somewher els , but bear with me .
thi will simplifi the algebra just ever so slightli .
now let's move on from thi , the pop , pictur of the gener popul to that portion of the popul that is engag in mate and creat progeni .
if an individu is infect , ha two lowercas as in their genotyp , thei die earli and therefor cannot mate .
in other word , two lowercas a genotyp individu ar forbidden from mate .
in ani case our set is as now follow .
we start with an overal popul and of thi popul onli a segment , the normal homozyg and the hetrozyg who ar carrier but do not show visibl evid of the diseas .
thei themselv ar not sick .
these ar the onli individu who ar allow to mate .
for simplic thei're go to assum that both sex have these genotyp in the same proport .
now if thi is the case , let's consid a set where we had <num> of the popul wa normal and homozyg , <num> wa heterozyg , <num> wa infect .
then , the <num> of infect individu cannot mate , and that leav <num> of the popul who can mate .
of thi <num> , <num> ar normal and homozyg , and so thei compris <num> out of <num> , or two in three , or two third of the whole mate popul .
and the heterozyg individu , the carrier , compris <num> out of <num> , or on third of the mate popul .
of cours what i've just describ for you is just a simpl exercis in condit probabl .
what we're realli ask is the follow question .
if we actual remov the sick individu from the popul and we select an individu at random , what is their genotyp ?
thei will be normal and homozyg from the mate popul with a probabl of u divid by <num> minu w .
the factor <num> minu w in the denomin is just renorm so that the smaller subset of mate individu now ha got unit size .
of cours , thi is just condit probabl , right ?
what we ar sai is u over <num> minu w is exactli the same as u divid by u plu 2v , becaus u plu 2v plu w is <num> .
likewis , the proport of individu in the mate popul who ar heterozyg is twice v over <num> minu w .
all right , so our origin probabl distribut ar now adapt slightli to take into account thi new circumst , that sick individu ar unabl to mate .
now , in thi mate popul , we just , we still have the two gene repres .
we have uppercas a and lowercas a through the carrier .
let's keep an ey on the frequenc at which the domin and the recess and lethal gene appear .
if on select a gene at random from a select individu who is mate , well , if that individu is normal and homozyg it will certainli be a domin normal upper case a gene .
but if the individu is a carrier , then half the time that will be a normal gene , and half the time it will be the recess and lethal gene .
let's introduc a littl bit of notat and keep thi at the back of our mind , right ?
so , the experi is as follow .
we pick a random individu , male or femal , from the mate pool , which mean that thei ar either normal and homozyg or heterozyg , and we select a gene .
we're look just a littl bit ahead becaus in the mate process , each individu will confer on gene to the progeni .
so if you pick on gene out of the pair which make up the genotyp , then that gene will be domin with probabl on , if the ge , individu wa normal and homozyg , it'll be normal with probabl on half if the individu were heterozyg .
sum the two togeth , and thei get the proport of the domin gene in the mate popul .
likewis , if from an individu mate , you select a gene , what proport of the time is that gene recess and lethal ?
well , it cannot be recess or lethal if the , the individu origin had a normal homozyg gene , becaus that individu doe not have a lethal gene to proffer .
but if the individu were a carrier and their genotyp wa of the form uppercas a and lowercas a , then half the time , among the heterozyg proport of the mate popul , will a lethal gene emerg .
let's call p the fraction of the domin gene in the mate popul , and let's call q , the fraction of the lethal gene in mate popul .
of cours p plu q must be <num> .
now , thi give us a goodli set to start with .
our next step , of cours , is to put individu togeth and consid the mate process which lead to progeni and the pass on of hereditari characterist .
let's keep an ey first on the mate popul proport .
rememb onli the normal homozyg or the heterozyg individu can mate .
and thei appear in the mate sub popul in proport u over <num> minu w and <num> v over <num> minu w .
when you proce to these your random select , the idea is as follow .
select a male from the mate popul .
select a femal from the mate popul .
and now , you've got a pair of parent .
we shall be veri creativ here and simpli bow to stereotyp .
and repres the genotyp of the male in a blue color and the genotyp of the femal with a pink color .
sinc both male and femal ar restrict to either normal homozyg or heterozyg characterist .
there ar four possibl for the pair over genotyp .
both ar normal in homozyg .
the male is normal homozyg .
the femal is heterozyg .
the male is heterozyg , the femal is normal in homozyg and both male and femal ar heterozygot .
in the process of mate , each individu proffer on gene from their genotyp makeup .
and the two gene , on from the male , on from the femal , will then form the progeni's genotyp .
thi is the genotyp in the filial gener , the child's gener .
of cours , all possibl mix ar feasibl under the set .
and so , the child could have the normal homozyg aa genotyp .
the child could have the heterozyg genotyp .
the child could sadli be sick and have the lethal genotyp .
the probabl of these happen .
let's us the same notat we us earlier , with the prime to tell ourselv that thi is the filial gener .
let u prime be the probabl for the child is normal in homozyg .
<num> of u prime be the probabl that the child is heterozyg .
at w prime , the probabl that the child is , in fact .
now i haven't told you veri much about the probabl space at thi point .
i have been talk lightli about probabl .
but of cours , underli all of thi , there must be a chanc experi .
and here is where independ plai a central role .
and independ here plai a role in two place .
first , in parent select .
and second , in the select of the gene from the individu parent genotyp .
let's take thi in turn .
so , the first experi involv two trial .
on select a male from the mate popul .
on select a femal from the mate popul .
the idea of random select impli that these individu ar select independ and at random .
accord to the probabl on the upper right of your screen .
so let's consid the four case .
in the case where both male and femal ar normal and homozyg .
each of them ha got a chanc , u over <num> minu w of anchor .
sinc male and femal ar select independ under random select .
the probabl of thi is u over <num> minu w time u over <num> minu w .
i've color code thi to make it clear where these probabl ar come from .
on from the male , on from the femal .
what if the male is normal and homozyg and the femal is a carrier ?
she is heterozyg .
well , in thi case , the male ha got probabl u over <num> minu w .
the femal's got probabl 2v over <num> minu w .
and again , independ select mean we multipli the probabl .
likewis , if the male is a carrier , the femal is not an homozyg .
and final , when both individu ar heterozyg , both of them ar carrier .
we have now got a stage where we've got these a priori probabl , which set the stage .
set the tabl , as it were .
thi , these probabl repres the parent mix probabl , under the assumpt that we have so far .
to get to the filial genotyp , we now have to select gene .
on from each member .
okai .
let's take thi in turn .
to get a normal homozyg child , a child with two uppercas a's in the genotyp .
well , thi can be done with ani of the four combin .
in all four combin , both parent have at least on uppercas domin normal gene in thei're makeup .
and therefor , all four case can result in normal homozyg child genotyp .
what ar the chanc we want to alloc here ?
natur enough .
we're not think about a condit set .
we're think about the condit probabl of a filial genotyp emerg .
given a particular parent genotyp make up .
so let's start with the normal homozyg child genotyp .
there ar four possibl and the arrow go from left to right will tell you what's feasibl .
what is the probabl that start with two normal homozyg parent , you get a homozyg child .
well , each parent offer a domin upper case a gene with probabl <num> .
thei do not have lowercas a gene .
and therefor , their probabl is <num> time <num> .
we believ we , we assum that select of these individu gene constitut independ trial .
what about if the male parent is normal homozyg , the femal parent is a carrier , is heterozyg .
then the male parent , proffer anoth case a gene with probabl <num> .
the femal parent proffer the uppercas a gene on half of the time .
and therefor , the probabl is <num> time a half .
similarli , if the male is a carrier and the femal is normal and homozyg , the probabl is on half time <num> .
and final , if both of them ar heterozyg then each of them ha got a on half chanc of proffer the uppercas a gene .
and on half time on half probabl in that case .
notic how the condit probabl fall into a laps as it were .
just by read out from left to right what the circumst is .
what about the child genotyp , which is a carrier , which is a mixtur of an uppercas a and a lowercas a .
while in thi case , if the parent ar both normal and homozyg .
it is imposs for them to creat progeni who's genotyp is anyth other than normal and homozyg .
so there's a miss arrow from the first case .
but the three remain possibl can all creat carrier individu , and the probabl now ar on time a half .
on half time on and the third is onli on where a littl tot requir .
the third instanc we have two heterozyg parent , each with a mixtur of gene .
to obtain a heterozyg child , on of them will have to offer an uppercas a gene , the other will have to offer a lowercas a gene .
now thi can be done by the father offer the domin gene , the mother offer the lethal gene , or vice versa .
each of which ha got probabl on half time on half .
the pictur on the screen might make thing a littl clearer .
in a situat of a carrier , the male ha got both gene .
the femal ha got both gene .
and there ar four possibl for the next gene .
in on case , you find that both parent offer the clean gene .
in on case , on the left hand of your screen .
both parent offer the lethal gene .
and there ar two possibl in the middl , depend on who offer the lethal gene and who offer the domin gene .
all right , and now thi leav on last case .
the case where the child ha the diseas .
but thi is onli possibl when both parent ar heterozyg and each of them proffer the legal gene .
and it's got a probabl on half time on half .
let paus and take a look at what we've construct here .
what is the sampl space of thi underli chanc experi ?
all the sampl space ha got multipl element .
there's first the male genotyp in the parent .
then there's the select of the femal genotyp in the parent .
then the select of gene proffer by the male genotyp .
and then the select of the gene proffer by the femal genotyp .
we could abstract all of thi out by sai the follow .
there ar two toss of a bent coin who success probabl ar in the upper right of your screen .
these will tell you what the select of the parent genotyp is .
and then there ar two more toss .
thi time of a fair coin which select a gene at random from on of the two gene on each of the genotyp .
so two bent coin toss and two fair coin toss would describ the experi .
of cours , thi is a rather complic wai to look at it .
we can simplifi matter a littl bit now becaus we ar not look realli just at set .
where we have genotyp for parent and genotyp for children .
and we can put all of thi togeth and abstract all thi inform out veri , veri simpli .
as far as the genotyp of the filial gener .
we could reduc thi probabl space to three element .
the two parent genotyp and the child's genotyp .
in other word , a tripl of genotyp complet describ for our purpos what thi experi is about .
in thi space , where the sampl point ar tripl of genotyp .
event ar subset of the space and we'll us inform languag and notat to captur these event .
so for exampl on the left of your screen you have the four possibl parent genotyp combin .
each of these repres an event of space in the tripl .
for exampl , the two upper case a where both parent ar normal homozyg .
repres an event where the first two element ar normal homozyg and the third , the child's genotyp is someth .
of cours , onli on thing is possibl in thi case .
but if both parent were heterozyg , then the child's genotyp could be anyth .
these constitut the event descript .
and the problem structur allow us to directli includ modul an assumpt of random select .
and maintain modular , an assumpt of independ on multipl front .
there the probabl of the event on the left ar given in the tabl , as you see , by simpli multipli all the element togeth .
the rest of the stori , in creat the probabl measur , is given to us via the condit probabl .
which take us from parent genotyp to the filial genotyp .
and these can be a symbol of on ratio in anoth tabl like thi .
the row of the tabl tell you what the pair of genotyp ar .
the column to mean what the futur type ar .
and the condit probabl ar fill on the side .
togeth , these two tabl ar .
the pictur will tell you the entireti of the probabl space .
if we think of the probabl space here as be describ by tripl of genotyp .
we can extract the underli probabl measur .
at need by simpli multipli out the a priori probabl and these condit probabl .
which in the context of these , of thi flow of time , you'll natur identifi as transit probabl .
by simpli multipli them out term wise .
we get the probabl of everi atom tripl .
all the atom probabl ar now within our purview .
of cours , thi requir much more effort than you realli need to put in .
the condit probabl tell us everyth we need about thi particular experi .
we ar now equip to come down and ask and answer the question we start with .
which is , what can on sai about the distribut of genotyp in the theori of gener .
what is u prime ?
what is twice v prime ?
what is w prime ?
of cours , we would like an answer base upon the origin proport in the parent popul .
we turn to thi next .
we ar now equip to comput probabl of genotyp in the filial gener .
the condit probabl point the wai , and thei point to a natur partit of the probabl space .
paus for a moment and think about , how would you set up .
a , an express by partit the probabl space .
a littl introspect might have told you that it would be natur , complet natur , to partit thi space base upon who the parent were .
and that immedi open up the problem and give us the answer in on fell swoop , and all will be over by the shout , and just a smidgen of algebra .
so , let's begin .
what ar the chanc of obtain a child , whose genotyp is normal and homozyg .
in other word , two upper case a's .
let us call thi probabl u prime .
so , in other word , u prime is a probabl that the child's genotyp is two upper case a's .
we natur condit on each possibl for the parent genotyp .
both parent ar normal and homozyg .
the father is normal homozyg , the mother is a carrier , heterozyg .
the father is a carrier , the mother is normal and homozyg , both parent ar heterozyg .
thi is total probabl , the magic of addit .
onc you find the right wai to break up a problem , it becom transpar , even trite .
now , the express took more time to write than to imagin .
we could just as well have obtain thi by look at the figur on the upper right of your screen .
you want to get the child genotyp be normal and homozyg .
look up all the arrow that enter it , there ar four possibl , and sum over those four possibl .
the weight on an arrow is the condit probabl , multipli by the probabl of the a priori probabl of the parent genotyp and sum .
thi is all there is to it .
and in thi case , of cours we would just look at our tabl and write these number down if you wish .
and we get an algebra express .
thi is simpl .
the denomin is a squar of <num> minu w .
it's common to all the term we collect , collect numer .
write it down .
and now , recogn that in the numer , i've got a whole squar .
u squar plu twice uv plu v squar is inevit u plu v the whole squar .
though , in the intermedi step i've got a squar in the numer and a squar in the denomin .
and it'll be realli conveni , trust me , to re write it as simpli u plu v over on minu w , the whole squar .
a squar relationship ha emerg from thi algebra mess .
let's hold on to that for a moment , all right , it's go to turn out to be particularli inform and illumin and us , but right now , we just got a squar and for our purpos we've done the problem .
given the ratio u to 2v to w for the genotyp in the parent genera , gener ; given that the infect individu cannot mate ; given random select and random mate .
the probabl that the child's genotyp is normal and homozyg is simpli u plu v divid by <num> minu w , the whole squar .
okai .
so forsak it .
if noth els , it's got the virtu of be simpl .
what about the probabl that a child end up be a carrier , the child ha a heterozyg genotyp ?
okai , to be consist , we're go to call the probabl for the heterozyg case in the filial gener , twice v with a prime , to distinguish it from the correspond situat in the parent genotyp .
so twice v prime is the probabl that the child ha got a heterozyg genotyp .
and we do exactli the same thing .
we're go to condit base upon the four possibl for the parent genotyp .
and when we do that , we realiz that the case where both parent ar normal and homozyg cannot contribut .
becaus in that case , neither parent can proffer a lethal gene .
and now we've got anoth algebra system , a littl simpl , the factor on minu w the whole squar is common in the denomin in each of the fraction , two is common in the denomin , put everyth togeth and we've got anoth simpl express .
and it will , again , be conveni , trust me , to realiz that , in the numer , the factor two is common , so it can factor it out .
the factor v is common , it can factor that out .
and we'll separ it into twice a product of two fraction .
u plu v over on minu w , and v over on minu w .
the last case follow exactli the same pattern .
but it's even simpler .
becaus the child can have the lethal genotyp if and onli if both parent ar heterozyg and both parent proffer the lethal gene .
in thi case , three of the possibl vanish leav simpli the last on .
write it down , and we find again , oh , there's a beauti squar .
we get v divid by <num> minu w , the whole squar .
at thi point , you see all the probabl ha been exhaust , but the stori ha not been exhaust , right ?
the result ar eleg and simpl enough to suggest that there might be some inform that is hide in these pattern .
let's try to look at thi more carefulli .
and , the wai we're go to do thi is by set up the parent genotyp on on hand .
and the filial gener on the other , and look at the probabl number as you go from on gener to the next .
here's what we know .
in the parent gener , on the left of your screen , we start with an origin popul where male and femal have genotyp , normal homozyg , heterozyg or lethal .
in the proport u twice v w .
if you want for definit distinct <num> , <num> and <num> .
of that subgroup , lowercas a , lowercas a genotyp individu ar forbidden from mate , sadli .
and so , in the mate sub popul on the parent side , the normal homozyg individu appear in proport u divid by <num> minu w .
and the heterozyg individu appear in the proport twice v over <num> minu w .
and if we look at the gene these individu proffer then , individu in the mate popul , in the parent pop , gener proffer the domin normal gene uppercas a .
with a probabl p .
given by u plu v over <num> minu w and proffer a lethal gene , a littl a with probabl q given by v over <num> minu w .
now , we'll us the same notat for the filial gener on the right of your screen .
in the filial gener , the genotyp appear in proport , and we'll us the letter u , two v and w again , with prime on them now to remind ourselv that we're deal with the next gener .
when that gener mate , then again , lethal infect individu cannot mate , and the remain individu normal homozyg and heterozyg make the proport u prime over <num> minu w prime and twice v prime over <num> minu w prime .
and final , in that mate subgroup in the filial gener , the , domin and the lethal gene appear in the proport's p prime and q prime .
exactli as befor , now , the whole point of exercis is that the probabl on the right ar confer by the probabl on the left , by the relat in the middl of your screen .
thi is what we've discov , thi is what total probabl gave us .
it look simpl enough , but further simplif ar immedi at hand .
take a good look at thi claim .
doe anyth jump out at you ?
if you look at the lower left of your screen , you'll realiz that the probabl p and q with the parent gener , appear to have the same form as the express for the filial genotyp probabl in the middl .
and inde , we notic , quit serendipit , these beautifulli eleg result .
the normal homozyg probabl for a child is simpli p squar .
the squar of the probabl , or the proport of the normal gene offer , dure in the mate popul .
the percentag of the popul , which is heterozyg in the filial gener twice v prime , or at least expect proport of thi popul the probabl of get a heterozyg child is twice p q .
and the probabl of get a sadli infect child , w prime , is simpli q squar .
all thi is a remark and beauti , and eleg simplif .
and thi is go to lead to perform consequ .
so , let's now step back and ask the follow basic question .
recal that the lethal gene , lethal a is in the parent mate popul with proport q .
it is in the filial gener's mate popul with proport q prime , of cours , q prime is relat to v prime and w prime , which in turn is relat to u , v , and w .
well , what is that relat ?
well , let's write thi down .
so , q prime is v prime over <num> minu w prime .
but , twice we v prime is twice p q .
and therefor , v prime is just p time q and w prime is q squar , so , we get p , q over <num> minu q squar .
and an element factor will tell you that <num> minu q squar in the denomin is <num> minu q time <num> plu q .
veri well .
but we realiz , wait a minut , that p plu q is <num> and therefor , <num> minu q is the same as p .
if you cancel <num> minu q the denomin with p the numer , that leav you a veri eleg and simpl result .
you could hardli ask for more .
the fraction or the expect fraction if you will of the lethal gene in the mate popul in the filial gener is given by the ratio of the expect fraction of the lethal gene in the mate popul of the parent gener divid by <num> plu q .
a littl rejiggeri will make it even simpler .
simpli , take the ratio , take the reciproc of both side .
so , if you look at <num> over q prime , on the left hand side .
that is the same as sai , <num> plu q over q .
which is the same as sai , <num> over q plu <num> .
or , in word , we can put it veri succinctli .
the reciproc of the lethal gene in the mate popul in the filial gener , is given by the reciproc of the proport of the lethal gene in the pendl popul plu <num> .
tableau <num> , from poll to bomb .
part <num> enter the binomi distribut .
the tableau will be in two part .
part <num> , we'll introduc the august binomi distribut .
the first of the three fundament distribut in the theori of chanc .
and as we shall see , it aris natur through the consider of poll process .
the second part will deal with the emerg of the whimsic mysteri poisson distribut and that will be the context of rare event .
and as we shall see a noteworthi exampl , remark exampl aris when you look the distribut of bomb hit .
so thi is our set for the current tableau and without further adieu let start by discuss the set from which the binomi distribut aris .
let me start with a polit set that is familiar to mani peopl .
in mani countri we have , let's sai , two domin parti , polit parti .
and here is a montag show , for exampl , how polit persuas chang across unit state over a centuri or so .
the two domin polit parti in the us at thi time ar the republican and the democrat .
and as you see across the montag of imag , the densiti of republican and democrat concentr ha chang quit dramat in time .
thi is familiar to individu in mani polit set .
and so let me abstract out what is kei here .
we're think about two polit parti in a countri and at a larg level , what we have seen now is that the , at least the vote populac of a countri , ar split into two primari sub popul .
in the unit state , the democrat and the republican , but , and of cours in other countri , you can replac them by two other larg polit parti of your choic .
there ar exampl of set where we have dichotom popul or princip dichotom popul .
here's anoth exampl , thi time from environment scienc .
a consequ of human travel faster and quicker around the world is that thei carri indigen speci with them to far off local .
thi can have undesir and sometim veri deleteri consequ to the local environ .
spectacular instanc of thi aris , for exampl , in the florida everglad where the creatur at the top of the pyramid is the florida allig .
but over the last centuri , a , an interlop arriv , the burmes python .
now , of cours the burmes python is not nativ to these part .
it is brought in from asia perhap releas into the wild when it becam inconveni larg and found that the environ wa veri conduc to spread and so it did .
and now we have two larg creatur sit at the top of the pyramid .
and that's caus chang to the entir perimet structur of exist within the florida everglad .
there ar mani other exampl .
for instanc , in the african great lake of victoria , malawi , and tanganyika , the nativ fish ar the cichlid ar languid high biodivers rather placid as a speci .
in the middl of the 20th centuri an aggress interlop wa introduc for sport fish purpos .
thi is the nile perch .
and of cours , in retrospect , it is clear what would happen , the nile perch start take over .
it's take out larg domain in these water .
to of cours the detriment of the sickl .
what is the proport of the nile perch sickl todai ?
we know it is an issu , but how doe on figur out how big an issu it is ?
til anoth exampl of a dichotom popul aris in industri qualiti control .
whether it is of comput chip , car , wrench , or what have you .
an organ , when thei produc a product , want to make sure the product is of high qualiti , becaus recal ar expens and lead to bad public .
and therefor the qualiti control process tri to identifi object that ar not up to snuff , object that ar defect .
if the manufactur process creat too mani defect entiti , then the organ suffer .
what proport of the product is defect ?
still yet anoth exampl of a di , a dichotom popul .
we've alreadi seen exampl of recess and lethal gene .
differ genet variat , let's sai there ar two of them , caus a dichotom popul fall into on or the other camp .
what proport of the popul , sai , ha got a recess and lethal gene ?
sai , that of sickl cell anemia .
on more exampl to set the stage .
and of cours thi is veri familiar to all of us , if we open a newspap , listen to the new , watch a blog , read a blog , opinion post .
what opinion do peopl have posit or neg on a varieti of topic , for exampl it could be highli controversi .
univers health care on on hand , resili individu choic on the other .
intervent into a troubl part of the world , or not .
and so on , and so forth .
in all these instanc , we have an exampl of an underli popul , possibl veri larg number and that popul consist primarili of two piec .
it is a dichotom popul .
of cours we understand that in the real world we can have more than two sub popul .
but of cours as georg polya would recommend for us , when we start look at a complex problem , it is wise to start by look at the simplest version of the problem we don't understand .
in ani case , in all the exampl i've list for you on the screen , all of these ar instanc where popul ar larg , or primarili , dichotom .
and in such set , the basic , the fundament question that aris for us is the follow .
how can we estim the make up of the sub popul mix of the underli popul ?
so , thu far we ; ve seen that the binomi distribut aris serendipit , for exampl , in the analysi of pole , in the test of sarin vaccin , in sundri problem , in the throw of dice , in card , and of cours in the toss of a coin .
but if we want to go beyond a qualit understand of where distribut aris .
go beyond a subject feel of , well , thi seem to fit the problem well .
and get to a posit where we have a quantit understand of what is go on .
if we , for exampl , want to give certain guarante on how well we estim someth .
we ar go to have to dig deeper into the mathemat innard of the distribut , of the particular function that it compris the binomi .
so accordingli , let's jump right in and start with an imag that we have seen befor .
so , on the screen you see exampl of three binomi distribut .
we have fix the number of trial at n equal to <num> , and vari the success probabl from <num> to <num> , that is to sai a fair coin , to <num> .
and the mass function ar plot on the screen for you .
now when on look at thi particular graph for these mass function , we see that certain characterist sort of jump out at us .
so in particular it seem to be clear that these atom mass sort of increas gener , reach a maximum , a crescendo , and then sort of decreas gentli .
in other word , thei have a unimod charact .
someth like an arabian camel .
but of cours is thi metaphor a bactrian camel would be bimod .
and i guess an alien camel from somewher els could be multimod .
but we ar deal with an arabian camel .
a singl mode .
on maximum .
there ar other featur that ar also seem to be evid in thi kind of pictur .
for instanc , there seem to be a center tendenc .
so pick a distribut .
let's sai for p equal to <num> .
it look clear that the mass ar center around <num> success , right at the midpoint .
and thei seem to be distribut reason evenli on both side .
now , when the coin is fair , when p is <num> thi tendenc is veri clear .
in fact , there's complet symmetri on both side of the center .
but thi kind of overal gener symmetri seem to be also persist when p is <num> and p is <num> , in other word the mass ar spread reason evenli around a central point .
there is a center tendenc .
still then to the point that might come to our attent is that the spread of like valu for the accumul number of success is spread fairli tightli around the central area .
ye , in a hundr toss of a coin it is possibl to get no success whatsoev , but the probabl is miniscul , it's realli tini .
most of the mass seem to be concentr around the center .
and so there's an idea , a notion , of a spread or a dispers around the center .
and final , and thi conclus seem inescap becaus of the graphic demand of the figur , there appear to be a gener bell shape to the distribut .
if you connect the dot , as it were , we find that a beauti littl bell curv emerg .
none of these ar serendipit or accident .
and so we will examin each of these featur on at a time but defer the last , the bell curv , the most import of them all , for a subsequ tableau .
i mean in fact , it is so import we should devot a conclud tableau just to that on issu .
so we'll focu for , for the node on our observ unimod , our center tendenc , and the natur of the spread around the center .
let us now begin with our perceiv unimod of the distribut .
it seem inescap obviou , when on look at the graph , that the atom mass probabl increas and then decreas .
how could on verifi such a phenomenon , in gener , for an arbitrari valu for the number of trial , n , and for an arbitrari valu for the bia probabl , p ?
well , natur enough , if there is such a tendenc , on might be tempt to consid what happen to subsequ valu of the atom mass function .
and in particular , let us consid the ratio of the probabl that there ar exactli k success to the probabl that there ar k minu <num> success .
we won't at thi stage put ani particular restrict on what k mai be .
and so we just look at two consecut valu for the number of success .
for each of them we have a binomi probabl .
for the probabl of the numer , we just have the ordinari binomi probabl that appear on the top right of your screen .
and that is the binomi coeffici , time b to the k , time q to the n minu k .
in the denomin , we ar look at a success probabl for exactli k minu <num> success , and so all we have to do , is take our express for b n of k , and replac k throughout by k minu on .
and now we've got a fraction .
and it's alreadi begin to look a littl intimid .
but , no matter .
let us begin by expand out the binomi coeffici .
rememb , that n choos k is n to the power k fall divid by k factori , and n choos k minu <num> is n to the k minu <num> fall , divid by k minu <num> factori .
and so if you write it out in gori detail , oh my good , we get a realli messi , long express , don't we ?
but thing ar go to simplifi veri quickli .
the binomi coeffici n choos k in the numer and the binomi coeffici n choos k minu <num> in the denomin .
now , for the fraction , on the left , you find that it ha an extra factor , n minu k plu <num> in the numer and an extra factor k in the denomin .
the power of p , the power of q likewis cancel a numer and denomin , leav an extra p in the numer and an extra q in the denomin .
now , now everyth compact and simplifi in a hurri .
and we get a nice and compact littl fraction .
so the ratio of two success binomi probabl is given by n minu k plu <num> time p divid by k time q .
hm , what can we conclud from thi ?
bear in mind that we ar look for evid of unimod .
that is , that the binomi probabl ar increas up to a certain point and decreas thereaft .
if on is in the increas potion of the curv , then the success of probabl must be increas and therefor the ration of success probabl must be bigger than on .
what now , if p k is bigger than b of k minu <num> ?
that sai the fraction on the right is bigger than on , and now we immedi have a criteria .
a success binomi probabl is strictli larger .
if and onli if n minu k plu <num> time p is larger than k time q .
let us savor thi .
thi is an eleg and simpl inequ but of cours we do want to simplifi it a littl bit further .
take the quantiti minu k time p on the left of the inequ to the right hand side .
and now our inequ is transform into sai , n time p , plu p , exce k time p plu k time q .
we feel irresist compel to factor out k on the right .
leav you k time p plu q , but bare in mind that p is the success probabl and q is <num> minu p , the failur probabl , or in other word p plu q is equal to <num> .
we now have a beauti and simpl criteria .
the success of binomi probabl is larger , provid np plu p is larger than k or in other word , we have a kei conclus .
the binomi probabl , b of k , increas as long as k is no larger than np plu p , and decreas thereaft .
np plu p , of cours , in gener , is some real number .
p , of cours , is someth between zero and on .
so thi sai that around an integ next to n time p is where the maximum of the distribut occur .
now , thi alreadi give us some ad evid in favor of our estim of a subpopul , paramet p , from a sampl .
the binomi distribut ha it's maximum valu at around n time p or in other sword , sn divid by n , the fraction of success is in a sampl of size n achiev it maximum valu just around p .
we have establish now that the binomi distribut ha unimod charact .
the binomi probabl increas up to an integ in the vicin of n time p , and the decreas thereaft .
let us turn now to what is visibl , what is clear in the figur .
that there is a center tendenc , a center around which the binomi probabl ar roughli evenli distribut .
consid the set where we have <num> trial , <num> toss of a coin whose success probabl is <num> .
the binomi probabl ar as shown in the figur .
it is clear that there is a unimod charact .
and the maximum valu , the largest probabl occur exactli at n time p in thi instanc at <num> time <num> , or <num> .
now , to captur the idea of center , we turn to an idea common from physic , the notion of a centr of mass .
to put thi in a proper context , it might help if we simpli flip the figur .
imagin that at each of the valu <num> through <num> , we've got a mass attach , whose weight is given by the binomi probabl .
now if we have a set like thi , we have a distribut of mass .
imagin temporarili that all the mass were the same .
then we have a set like thi approxim , where we have a uniform distribut of mass .
now , think of a see saw .
where would the point of balanc be ?
where would the fulcrum be ?
that is the centr of mass .
and in a situat where the mass is evenli distribut , the center would manifestli be right in the center , in the middl .
but if the mass were unevenli distribut , as is the case in your figur , then on ha a set , perhap like thi , where mass is larger at on end than at the other .
now in thi case , we would not have equilibrium right in the middl , but in fact the centr of mass , where both side ar balanc , shade toward the larger mass .
now thi is exactli the kind of set we have in front of us .
we now want a mathemat prescript which capsi , captur thi idea of thi probabilist centr of mass .
common convent refer to thi by the greek letter mu , and we write it down exactli as we would in physic , as follow .
to the point <num> , we attach a mass whose weight is b of <num> .
to the point <num> , we attach a mass whose weight is b of <num> .
to the point <num> , we attach a mass whose weight is b of <num> .
to the point k , in gener , we attach a mass of weight b of k , and so on .
thi weight sum then give us veri natur the probabilist analogu of the physic idea of a centr of mass .
now , it is comfort to write a long sum like thi down becaus it make transpar exactli what each element contribut .
but when on doe an analysi it is conveni to compact thi us summat notat .
and write it simpli in the form as a summat over an index k , which vari in thi case between <num> and n , of quantiti of the type k time b of k .
the connect with the physic centr of mass should be transpar here .
we call thi the expect of the accumul success , s sub n .
and we denot it by e of sn .
e of cours stand for expect .
sn is the accumul number of success in our chanc experi .
and thi is also refer to sometim as the mean or the expect valu .
and of cours , on recogn in thi just a gener , the analog of an arithmet averag .
now , all these term ar us , thei add color to the pictur .
but , especi for a neophyt , someon start out of the gate , it would be advis to think of thi object by it formal mathemat connot , by refer to it as a mathemat expect .
mean therefor , that there is an underli , veri specif mathemat formul which captur thi .
and thi , in thi case of cours , it is a weight sum .
in mani case and practic , when there is an ambigu , by long forc of tradit we will simpli call thi just mu .
but when there ar more that on chanc experi at plai , then we will refer to it particularli as e of sn , the expect valu , the expect of sn .
so now we've got a formul .
we've now got a mathemat model for a center of mass .
our next question then is , well , what doe it evalu to ?
of cours , we could comput thi numer .
if you tell me n is <num> and p is <num> , we could just simpli write down an arithmet sum .
evalu the valu , add them up and here's an answer .
but of cours thi is not veri satisfactori , it doesn't give us a feel for the problem .
it doesn't tell us how thi expect depend upon a number or trial n and how it depend upon a success probabl p .
so what we ar look for now , what we ar cast about for , is a simpl , compact , mathemat simplif of the sum , which make transpar for us , the rule plai by the number of trial n , and the success probabl p .
so accordingli , let us take a good hard look at the sum .
it is clear that we're go to have to add term of the kind k time b of k .
and a littl algebra ahead of time will smooth a pathwai .
so accordingli , let's identifi a typic term in the sum , k time the binomi probabl associ with k success .
write out down the binomi probabl , and now we've got a simpl algebra equat to deal with .
if we want to simplifi it , we should begin by take the binomi coeffici and write it out .
in term of a fall factori , and a factori in the denomin .
now we're get a messi look , more complex express .
we ar try to identifi the rule of k here .
rememb , k is what i'm go to be ad over .
k is go to rang between <num> and n in the sum .
i notic that the factor k multipli the express is in the numer and is a k factori in the denomin , which mean i can cancel k in the numer and denomin .
let us go ahead and directli do so .
and now , we've got a slightli , ever so slightli simpler express .
with k minu <num> factori in the denomin .
thi is an algebra excursu and it's not clear that anyon could realli love that express , perhap not even it mother .
but , if we want to make progress in simplifi it , we should look for some theme here .
and a clue is point to us by the appear of k minu <num> factori in the denomin .
that is begin to be suggest of anoth binomi coeffici .
thi time involv k minu <num> .
let us see if we can massag the express to make thi depend on k minu <num> evid .
first , in the numer of the fraction , we have k term .
pick the first on , let's sai n , and move it out of the fraction .
that will leav us k minu <num> term in the numer .
you have a product of k minu <num> term , each on less than the preced start at n minu <num> and end at n minu <num> , minu k minu <num> plu <num> or in other word , end at n minu k plu <num> .
we make a littl progress .
our next step is to observ that the power of p can be decompos into a product of p with p to the power k minu <num> .
again , a k minu <num> emerg .
take the extra factor p and move it out of the faction to the left .
now what do we have ?
well , let's simplifi it .
we pull a term n and a term p out of the express , keep it on the left and hold it .
and then what remain is a fraction , a fall factori in the numer start at n minu <num> .
and proceed for k minu <num> term .
there it is .
and replac the last term , n minu k plu <num> , by simpli subtract <num> and ad <num> back into the term to make the depend on n minu <num> and k minu <num> manifest .
then i've got p to the power k minu <num> .
and final , a power of q which i can decompos by again subtract <num> and ad <num> .
and write it as q to the power n minu <num> minu k minu <num> .
that look horribl complex but you realiz that the express , the fraction is just anoth binomi coeffici .
it is just n minu <num> choos k minu <num> .
and , immedi , the term multipli n time p becom identifi with yet anoth binomi probabl .
and here is a kei binomi ident .
on the left , i have a gener integ k time the binomi probabl b of k .
now let us identifi the rule and the paramet n and p explicitli .
sai on the left , we have k time b sub n of k and p .
think of k as a free variabl .
n and p ar your fix paramet .
on the right , i have n time p time the binomi probabl correspond to k minu <num> accumul success in n minu <num> toss of your coin , with success probabl p .
and now , we've got a beauti ident .
on the left , we have a default experi involv n toss of a coin .
on the right , we have connect it to an experi involv n minu <num> toss of a coin .
it's not clear that thi , these kind of algebra manipul have taken us much further forward .
but a littl experi will tell us that we've done someth veri us .
we have taken a multipli factor , k on the left , and replac it effect by someth which doesn't depend upon the free variabl by a constant , n time p , on the right .
thi is go to pai us big dividend .
but , befor we jump ahead of ourselv .
thi kind of gener algebra formula is valid for all choic of k and all choic of the paramet , n and p .
we can get a whole host of other formula , simpli by replac k and n by differ valu on both side of the equat .
so for instanc , if i replac n by n minu <num> , and k by k minu <num> , i get an equival formula .
just conduct the replac on both side , and now i've got an express on the left involv a default experi involv n <num> minu <num> toss of a coin .
and on the right , a connect to an experi involv n minu <num> toss of that coin .
we alreadi have enough here to go ahead and comput the expect .
but thi algebra maneuv is suggest that there ar other possibl .
so let's take a littl detour what a view to a latent necess , and pick up on more ident .
find a simpler express for k squar time b n of k .
you're go to keep p fix but arbitrari , and what you would like to do is find an express for k squar of b n of k in term of an express involv , of cours k and n .
paus the lectur and see if we can make some progress into try to simplifi thi express .
a kei is go to be found in the observ that k squar can be decompos into a product k time k .
restart the lectur when you're readi .
so let us begin by write down an express for k squar time b n of k .
with thi observ in mind , by factor k squar as k time k , let's group on of the <num> ks with the binomi probabl and keep the other k outsid the round bracket .
now take a look at the express insid the round bracket .
doe that look familiar ?
of cours it doe .
thi is inde our basic binomi ident .
replac k time b f k by n p time b n minu <num> of k minu <num> , and now we've got a new express on the right .
let's massag thi , collect term , put k and the binomi probabl back togeth .
and now , we've got an express that we wish to massag further .
now , thi look promis .
insid their own bracket on the right , i've got k time a binomi probabl involv a minu <num> .
that look suggest of the second of our basic ident .
except for on small thing .
if i had k minu <num> instead of k , then i could directli us the second basic ident .
well , no matter .
let's start with k , and simpli replac it by k minu <num> plu <num> , by the simpl expedi of subtract <num> and ad <num> .
now , the moment i did that , then our express insid the long bracket expand a littl bit , but it's begin to look more formid , to be sure .
but , here's the kei .
the first term insid the long bracket is of the form k minu <num> time a binomi probabl involv n minu <num> .
and the second end of the term is just the binomi probabl by itself .
we're in busi , becaus now we've got a game of basic binomi ident that we can us .
and we simpli replac the first of those term by a binomi probabl involv n minu <num> now .
all right .
now we've got a bigger express .
and of cours , we could simplifi it a littl bit by first collect togeth everyth involv the binomi probabl , involv a minu <num> trial , and then everyth involv the binomi probabl involv n minu <num> trial .
and now we've got an ident .
have we made ani progress what so ever ?
look on the left we actual have a veri simpl express , k squar time b n of k .
on the right it look like we've got a god aw mess , but it is actual a simplif .
the kei is the multipli factor scale the left have all vanish on the right .
the factor k have all fold insid the binomi probabl .
and thi ha got a great advantag becaus of normalis of probabl measur .
imagin that we simpli sum both side of our ident overal valu k .
on the left , i've got an integr look sum .
k squar time b n of k sum doubl k .
but , on the right , i end up with sum of just pure binomi probabl .
and we know that these sum add to on .
so for exampl , if we fix at , affix b .
and we all sum over all k .
then the probabl of get <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or n success in n toss of the coin is assuredli <num> .
if it is to be consid an experi where we toss the coin in minu on time and we sum the probabl be minu on of k minu on over all k .
well , that just sai sum of all possibl for success in n trial , and again the binomi probabl add to <num> .
and likewis , if you some of roll k , the probabl is p n minu <num> , of k minu <num> .
it came we ar consid an experi , thi time involv n minu <num> toss of the coin , and we're sum all possibl for the accumul number of success and again these probabl add to <num> .
thi observ simplifi all our calcul .
and let's immedi put it to good us by come back to the question of the expect valu of the binomi .
we now have two hard won ident , and we should hold them .
a basic binomi ident involv k time b n of k .
and on we've discov with just a littl bit of algebra affect .
an ident involv k squar time b n of k .
the first of those will be immedi us , the second veri shortli .
so let's write down the express for the expect of the accumul number of success .
e of s n , also in the common languag call mu .
and given by a weight sum of binomi probabl .
to the term k time b of k , we immedi replac it by our basic binomi ident .
sinc n time p doe not depend upon k , it can be pull out of the sum .
and now we've got a sum of binomi probabl involv a tacit experi , where a coin ha been toss n minu on time , and we're sum overal k .
as we sum overal k , then we sum over all possibl for success in those n minu on toss , from zero success all the wai up to n minu on success .
and the normal of probabl measur tell us that thi sum must be exactli <num> .
and so , the sum just vanish , quietli , like the snow of yesteryear .
and what remain is simpli np time <num> .
or of cours just n time p .
on could hardli ask for a simpler , cleaner , more intuit solut to the problem .
the expect of a binomi distribut correspond to n toss of a coin , who's sexist probabl is p is exactli n time p .
the expect valu , the probabilist center of mass coincid with the maximum probabl .
the pictur , here .
i mean , thi , at some level , might seem obviou .
but not at all so , realli .
becaus on could imagin a set where on had a mastiff , let's sai .
where on ha a sharp peak and then a long fallout .
if you had someth like that , then ye , you do have a unimod charact .
but most of the mass is on the other side of the peak , and that for the center of mass will be veri far from the maximum valu .
the fact that thi doe not happen for the binomi is import , in fact , huge import .
what our calcul tell us for the expect valu is that , not onli is the maximum probabl around n time p , but thi is a true center , in that the probabl , the mass ar distribut fairli evenli around the center .
not exactli equal , but roughli evenli , in such a wai that the center of mass coincid exactli with the point where the probabl is largest .
we have further evid now that our estim procedur actual is do someth veri well and veri correctli .
the maximum likelihood estim of an unknown p , turn out to be s of n divid by n .
and now , we've got two more piec of evid tell us that thi is actual veri reason , veri intuit , veri proper .
sn of n is not just the maximum likelihood estim of p , it is the place where you have the largest binomi probabl and it is also the place where the center of mass of the entir distribut li .
so thu far we have valid our observ that the binomi distribut ha a unimod charact .
the probabl increas and then decreas .
the point of maximum probabl correspond to a vicin of n time p .
the center of mass of the distribut is exactli n time p .
and the probabl ar distribut fairli evenli around that center of mass .
our next question , then , is , how ar the probabl dispers around the center of mass ?
ar thei highli dispers .
or ar thei more concentr ?
so let's begin by take a look at a familiar pictur .
consid the set where the number of trial is fix at <num> , and consid the effect of vari the bia probabl p .
sai we have three figur on our pictur , correspond to p <num> , and p <num> , , and p <num> .
it's clear , visual , that the distribut probabl ar most dispers where the coin is fair that the probabl get more concentr , albeit slightli , on the scale when p move awai from <num> .
a littl introspect will convinc us that thi is entir reason .
after all , if on ha a fair coin , we have a maxim unpredict outcom .
the moment that you put a bia into the coin , the outcom becom more predict , and therefor , that should suggest that a probabl distribut should be most unpredict , in other word , should be most spread out and not dispers when the coin is fair .
and , of cours , we see thi in the pictur .
now fix n ha fix on paramet of vari p .
the other possibl is to fix the success probabl and vari n .
so let us suppos that the success probabl is fix at <num> .
here is a pictur .
correspond to ten trial and we get someth veri much like what we've seen befor .
the maximum of thi distribut aris exactli at n time p which is the expect valu and happen at ten time <num> or at seven .
if we increas the number of trial while keep the success probabl fix .
sai we consid <num> trial .
now , we've got the experi where the number of success can be anyth between <num> and <num> .
the maximum probabl outcom correspond to the set where we have exactli n time p , or <num> time <num> , or <num> success .
and now , we have a spread around there .
if we increas n yet again , and look at n is equal to <num> trial , now , the largest probabl correspond to the expect valu of <num> time <num> or <num> , the probabl fall on either side .
now , it's veri clear , when on look at these pictur , that the probabl appear to be get increasingli cluster around the center .
it'll be conveni to view thi in a common scale .
after all , when n is <num> , then our x axi is run from <num> through <num> .
when n is <num> , we get from zero to <num> .
n is <num> , zero through <num> .
to put thing in a common scale , divid k , the number of success , by n .
call that x .
so as k run from zero to n , k over n or x run from zero to on .
now , we can plot everyth on a common scale from <num> to <num> , as a function of' x .
in other word , if we replac k by n time x , then in each of the <num> case , we can allow x to run between <num> and <num> , and obtain the variou binomi curv .
it's veri clear that as n increas that the probabl ar get more and more and more concentr around the central point .
of cours , the probabl is also decreas in height , but that is inescap becaus as we increas n , there ar more and more point with posit mass .
and thei all have to add to on by normal .
but the main idea that there is a shrink of a support of the distribut or the effect support of a distribut seem inescap .
now , to quantifi thi , we need to have a clear and simpl mathemat wai of quantifi thi notion of spread around the center .
let us turn to thi next .
as befor , physic and physic intuit give us a veri good start point for construct a measur of spread .
the pictur on your screen show you a familiar object , a binomi distribut correspond to <num> toss of a coin who's x's probabl is <num> .
more gingerli , we know what the binomi probabl look like , and now , we also know that the expect valu of the distribut occur exactli at n time p .
in thi case , with n be <num> and p be <num> , thei expect a valu that coincid exactli at the <num> .
now , suppos on doe the experi .
we toss a coin ten time and we count the number of success .
suppos we get eight success .
it's clear in the pictur that the probabl of eight success is not neglig , it's signific .
how far is eight from the center six ?
well , clearli , eight minu six ar two .
now , it make littl matter whether we ar to the right of six or to the left of six .
all that matter is how far we ar from the center .
that give us an idea of distanc from the center .
so , a <num> is just as far from <num> as <num> is on the other side .
and , therefor , we ar more interest in the absolut valu of the distanc from the center than in the distanc itself with a sign .
it would be more conveni in such set to consid the squar of the distanc .
and if we did that , we find an object which is on physic ground veri , veri , veri familiar .
the squar of the distanc of zero from six is <num> minu x the whole squar .
of cours , <num> success occur with a veri small probabl , v of <num> .
the squar of the distanc <num> from <num> is <num> minu <num> the whole squar or <num> squar .
of cours , on success occur in the set , again , with a veri small probabl , b of <num> .
but as k increas , <num> , <num> , <num> , the binomi probabl increas and is spread , k minu the center , the whole squar becom not at all unlik .
we simpli accumul the weight sum of squar distanc from the expect valu .
thi is call a varianc of the binomi , the varianc of the accumul number of success , and formal , it's written as <num> minu np the whole squar time the binomi probabl of <num> plu <num> minu np the whole squar time the binomi probabl of <num> .
the gener term is if <num> ha k success the squar deviat from the center is k minu np the whole squar .
you multipli that by b of k , the weight attach to that likelihood , and sum over all possibl .
we have weight sum .
the student might feel thi is vagu familiar , and inde it is .
in physic , thi correspond exactli to the concept of a moment of inertia of a physic system .
and now we have thi in hand , we should promptli compact the notat .
and put in place a summat notat sai , allow k to run over all possibl , in thi case over all the integ from zero through n , and for each such valu of k , take the squar distanc from mp , k minu mp the whole squar .
weight accord to the probabl of observ , k success and add .
and now , we have a mathemat , precis , clean concept of the idea of spread around the center .
thi is call a varianc , and if we want to identifi the underli experi , we'll write it as var for varianc of the accumul number of success as n .
tradit compel us when there ar no ambigu set to call thi the greek letter sigma squar .
of cours , sigma squar ha becom part of our common conscious .
it's becom part of our common understand it refer to frequent in new .
we here about sigma , <num> sigma deviat , <num> sigma deviat .
the concept aris in thi idea of a probabilist moment of inertia .
now , when it send that as we look at the varianc , we're look at a squar deviat , or more precis an expect squar deviat from the center of mar .
if on want the spread itself , natur enough , on should look at the squar root of thi quantiti .
thi is call the standard deviat .
it's , of cours , repres by sigma , and it is defin to be the posit squar root of the valu .
of cours , given an n and given a p , on could readili comput such a sum .
of cours , such a numer calcul ha it's own limit .
in particular , it give us no feel for the depend of the spread on the paramet n and p .
so , to do thi , we're go to need to do some more algebra spade work .
so let's turn to thi next .
the comput varianc , keep in mind , that we have to look at , is sum of squar distanc , squar deviat from the mean valu , from the expect .
to do thi , let's go back and take a look at a gener term in the sum .
sigma squar is the sum of k minu np , the whole squar , weight by the binomi probabl .
it look messi .
it look ugli .
but , to begin with , let's isol the role of k .
take a look at the whole squar insid the sum .
well , that look familiar .
well , that is of the form of a minu b the whole squar , which , as a veri earli middl school class ha taught us is given by the beauti formula a squar minu two ab plu b squar .
identifi a with k , b with np , and expand out the squar .
at the moment we do that , we've got an expand squar weight by binomi probabl , sum over all possibl .
on of the great virtu of addit is that the sum of a bunch of object can be done in ani order whatsoev .
thi is commonli call the associ properti of addit .
in thi case , let's group the sum togeth by first group the sum over the k squar term , then group the sum over the <num> n p time k term , and then final group the sum over the n squar p squar tab .
and if we do thi , we now have <num> separ sum .
now , it's go to begin to look moder complex , moder heavi , but it's go to simplifi in a hurri .
let's begin by look at the first sum on the right , the sum of k squar time b n of k .
we've alreadi done in our sampl exercis , .
a comput of what k squar time b n of k is , as we sai .
and therefor , simpli replac k squar b n of k by our ident involv binomi probabl of n minu <num> and binomi probabl of n minu <num> toss .
and sum all k give us a morbidli complex look express .
but we immedi realiz that the binomi probabl over b n minu <num> add to <num> , the binomi probabl over b n minu <num> add to <num> .
and so , the entir sum of k squar time b n of k p sum into a veri simpl express .
we have a close form answer , n time n minu <num> p squar plu n time p .
let's turn to the second sum .
now , we have a sum of k time b , n of k p , but .
we have a basic binomi ident .
replac k time b n of k p by a sum for v b n minu <num> .
the sum of the b n minu <num> probabl is again add to on binomi and then doe some .
we observ as now just n p time on , or n p , of cours , we realiz , we've just retrac our path in comput the expect valu .
thi sum is exactli the expect of the accumul number of success .
and final , the last sum .
and thi is the simplest of all .
we're sum over all the binomi probabl correspond to n toss of a coin , and that's sum manifestli by normal is on .
now each of the three term ha been simplifi at close form .
now , there's littl that remain bother shout .
all that remain now is assembl algebra the variou express and simplifi .
so let's begin .
the varianc is first a term correspond to the summat of k squar b n of k , then a term correspond to the sum of k time b n of k , then final a term correspond to the sum of b n of k .
and now we've got an express like thi .
and a littl algebra massag see that the term n squar p squar offer sever place in the express .
you end up have a total of n squar p squar minu <num> n squar p squar plu n squar p squar and those term vanish , leav behind a simpler express , minu mp squar plu n time p .
but , of cours , now we feel irresist compel to simplifi it further by factor out the quantiti n time p , leav behind n time p time <num> minu p .
on more step make it complet transpar .
we realiz that <num> minu p is exactli the failur probabl q .
and therefor , the varianc becom n p q .
again , on could hardli ask for a simpler resolut of what look like a veri complex sum .
and so to summar .
if on ha a binomi experi , well , if on accumul success over n toss of a coin whose success probabl is p , then the expect squar spread around the expect valu , around the mean , around the center of mass .
in other word , the varianc of thi distribut is exactli n time p time q .
we should veri quickli consolid by take a look at a pictur .
so let's go back to the set where p wa <num> and we vari n .
now we sai that the concentr of the distribut of the spread around the center is now quantit clear .
varianc is n time p time q .
the standard deviat or the true measur of the spread , is the squar root of the varianc , and that on behav like a squar root of n time p q .
in other word , if n is is <num> , then the spread is around squar root of n , around plu or minu <num> or <num> around the center .
now the red you start at <num> and you look at plu <num> , plu or minu <num> around <num> and you get most of the mass of the distribut .
if n were <num> , then the squar root of n is about <num> , and therefor , the spread of the distribut should be around plu or minu <num> unit around the center of <num> .
and again , it's veri clear that hi is exactli where the spread is .
and final , when it's <num> , then the squar root of <num> is <num> .
we expect most of the spread to be within <num> unit around the center of <num> .
the whole point of the exercis is thi , as n increas , the spread , the center of mass inreluctantli move to the right .
but the rel spread onli increas like the squar root of n .
so , if n is <num> , then the center is at <num> for a coin with a bia of . <num> .
it's at <num> for a coin with bia . <num> .
but the spread is about plu or minu <num> in both case .
if n were <num> , <num> , then the spread around the center is onli about <num> .
so , ye , of cours , the spread is increas as it increas , but proportion , much , much , much , much less than where the center is .
we should captur thi promptli in a slogan .
the binomi distribut is increasingli concentr around it expect valu as n increas .
let us summar what we have discov so far .
tableau <num> , from poll to bomb .
part <num> , deal with the poll portion of the segment and introduc the binomi distribut .
the basic element , the build block , off our entir class .
wa to form a model the toss of a coin .
and for thi we go back to jacob bernoulli and hi public of ar conjectandi in <num> .
the first time where a formal understand of a model for coin toss becam clear .
as an import and fundament build block in the understand of chanc process .
so accordingli , a bernoulli trial correspond to a formal coin toss .
the abstract outcom , let's sai x , is a number <num> or <num> , <num> connot a head or success , <num> a failur or a tail .
we allow the coin to be bias , but some sai success probabl p , and the correspond failur probabl q , equal to <num> minu p .
of cours , a humbl coin toss by itself is not veri interest .
we now build upon thi , and through the medium of repeat independ trial .
to construct a model of a pole , or of a random sampl .
so , accordingli , suppos x1 , x2 , x3 through xn , constitut repeat bernoulli trial .
repeat independ trial , correspond to the toss of a coin , whose success probabl is p .
at thi point the sampl space and inde the probabl splace , space is , is transpar .
the sampl space is a sequenc of n , 0s and 1s .
to which we attach atom measur obtain by multipli probabl of 0s and 1s .
that's the product measur .
we immedi , from thi rich sampl space , abstract out a kei element .
a chanc driven process of particular interest to us .
the accumul success in these n toss is denot by s sub n .
and of cours , is now just a sum of the valu x1 through xn .
at thi point , we have creat a new chanc process from the underli chanc process of repeat trial .
thi new process give you a valu , an ideal outcom s sub n .
which take valu in a new sampl space if you will of integ <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , up till n .
now natur enough , we ar interest in what is the probabl measur that is inherit by thi new chanc variabl , the accumul success .
and thi is inde .
is exactli the binomi distribut with two paramet , a number of trial in , and the success probabl peak .
with those held fix , the number of success rang over a sampl space from <num> through n .
with correspond atom mass probabl , the atom mass function is given by exactli the binomi distribut .
and our explor show us that we understand now what the distribut look like .
it got a unimodel charact .
it increas to a maximum valu in the vicin of n time p .
it ha a center of mass , an expect which is exactli n time p .
and it ha a varianc , and expect squar deviat from the center which is exactli n time p time q , or equival as standard deviat sigma , which is a squar root of npq .
in other word , as n increas .
the expect center move proport to n , but the expect spread move onli proport to the squar root of n around the center .
you get increas concentr around the center .
so we could've done thi from a pure abstract point of view , just .
imagin thi metaphor experi , do the algebra calcul , but of cours , thi is dry and bore .
what make thi come aliv is the rich panopli of applic of thi beauti simpl underli model .
the applic we have seen , span everi larg rang .
from card , to earn problem , to the throw of a die , of cours a toss of a coin , to more interest and complex set , such as , medic test of serum and vaccin and the process by which drug ar approv .
to understand , estim some popul of larg popul via small sampl .
we ar now in , in the provinc of statist test .
and in thi provinc , we now have thi rang panopli of applic .
who would have thought that the humbl coin toss had thi rich within it ?
onli experi will convinc a student that the simpl coin toss carri within it an inexhaust sourc of inspir .
and these applic ar a small shop window of some of the consequ and direct that on can go into when on explor coin toss .
for our purpos now , what we've done is , obtain a distribut form for an accumul number of success and found it applic in a wide rang of applic .
quo vadi ?
where doe on go from here ?
well , we now have an explicit mathemat form , we have some understand of it .
we have some , a feel for it's applic domain .
but if on tend to someth like pole we have , via fisher's maximum likelihood principl , a principl procedur for make guess about size of underli sub popul .
but what we don't yet have is ani guarante about the qualiti of thi procedur .
ye we now have some reason to believ that thi is a good wai to do it , but how good is it realli ?
how expens is it , and what ar the chanc of error ?
of cours these question ar still wait and loom for us .
we shall return to these question and these will be our conclud lectur in thi cours , and that will take us into the marvel , remark world , the fabul limit law , but befor we do that i want to take on small digress .
and thi connect us to a curiou , mysteri ident in approxim discov by sim on deni poisson in <num> .
and that discoveri , connect to the binomi , a rich new direct , lead to the provinc of rare event , arriv process , and knit it all togeth .
the second of the fundament distribut in chanc , the pearson distribut .
so , we shall come back in tableau ten , part two .
with the poisson distribut , and we'll see it applic in a plethora of beguil area , includ bomb and cue .
onc we've done that , we shall come back to the binomi .
and return to the question of how good our pull mechan realli is ?
tableau <num> , from poll to bomb .
part <num> , the poisson flit in .
we have seen how the binomi distribut aris natur in the context of poll and poll system , and we shall return to thi .
but todai , we shall take a small detour through an accident discoveri of simo n deni poisson , in the year <num> .
and , thi discoveri wa to have subtl and deep consequ .
along the wai , we shall discoveri the poisson distribut .
which , togeth with a binomi distribut , and the normal distribut , constitut the triad of fundament distribut in the theori of probabl .
the context is histor and rich .
and , the set is that of judici trial and , in particular , trial by juri .
listen of a particular ag would be familiar with the evoc imag of an atticu defend hi client in to kill a mockingbird , befor a bank of juror who ar deepli skeptic .
the principl of trial by juri is fundament to democrat institut .
and , in the unit state , in particular , in feloni trial it wa standard for mani , mani year to have a juri of <num> individu .
in the year <num> , in the case william versu the state of florida , thi principl wa challeng .
florida had reduc the number of juror from twelv to six in a particular feloni case .
william challeng it .
and , a bitterli divid suprem court rule that a decreas in size of juri from twelv to six did not contraven the constitut protect of the right of the accus to an imparti juri .
the constitut connect that is allud to is the sixth amend to the , the unit state constitut .
which guarante individu a right to a speedi , public trial with an imparti juri .
justic white opin in for the major in that case , that there's noth sacrosanct about the number of the juri .
so , as i said , a bitterli divid court , in the major , thei opin that in the function of the juri wa to exercis common sens judgement in the complaint between the plaintiff and the defend .
but , that the size of the juri did not effect the qualiti of thi judgement .
after thi judgement , a varieti of critiqu came up , and sever further judgement were made as well .
but , as late as <num> , the court reaffirm it posit .
thi time , justic rehnquist , write on behalf of the major , opin again that a juri of size twelv wa in no wai more reliabl , in term of the qualiti of the decis make , than a juri of size six .
it is not clear what statist , or mathemat refer , the court wa us , if ani , at that time .
but , a fundament question sure aris .
now , i sure do not want to get into the niceti of the legal argument here , or of what the constitut actual sai .
we're tread veri close to the limit of my knowledg on the subject .
but , as a citizen , it is clear that we need function juri to give us justic .
and , a fundament question then aris , what principl , mathemat principl , logic principl , societ principl , should govern the size of a juri ?
now , the nearest anteced to thi in histori wa about <num> year ago in late 18th centuri franc .
and , these question about democraci , and juri , and trial , were bubbl and come to a heat conclus .
of cours , thi wa go to be the time of the french revolut .
but , a note philosoph , mathematician , and polit scientist at that time wa nicola , marqui de condorcet .
and , condorcet wrote extens on thi subject .
in <num> , for instanc , he publish what is todai call condercet's juri theorem , in which he articul the follow principl .
that , if in a vote group , a juri , each member is more like than not to make a correct decis , then the probabl that the major vote yield the right decis increas as the group size becom larger .
now , i don't want to take a detour to try to prove thi , though it is not at all hard , right ?
and , if the listen now will spend a coupl minut think about what it'll take when you add two new member to a juri to improv the decis .
well , either both could be right , or both could be wrong .
if thei split the decis , then clearli noth ha chang .
but , if each slightli favor the correct decis over an incorrect decis , then the chanc of both get it right is go to exce the chanc of both get it wrong , and that is all there is to it .
of cours , there is a flip side of thi coin , and that is that if on ha an uninform juri , a collect of peer whose decis make is suspect .
and , who ar like more than half the time to come up with an incorrect decis , then the optim juri size is on .
a larger juri onli make thing wors .
ordr de in <num> , issu of juri size and select were becom more import , and deep thinker were articul essenti principl behind these idea .
now , condercet wa acut a , aliv to the fact that when juri make error , thei could make error in on of two direct .
and , thi wa pick up and articul by pierr simon , marqui de laplac in <num> .
we often malevol laplac , we've seen laplac .
hi idea aris in hi law of success in thi book on probabl in the year <num> .
laplac wa also deepli interest in societ issu , and he weigh on the juri select issu .
in particular , he articul a risk principl which laid out the essenti differ between the two differ kind of error that ar possibl .
so , if a juri make an error , it could be in these two flavor .
thei could convict an innoc person , or thei could acquit a guilti person .
and , laplac wa veri clear in hi view that the cost to societi were not the same for the two kind of error .
if on look at laplac's posit of the problem , he seem to be suggest that the societ cost is higher if on acquit a guilti person .
presum , to go on and commit other heinou crime , than it is to convict an innoc person .
and clearli , alreadi here , fundament question about democrat institut ar aris .
in which direct should we offer more protect ?
fundament , here now , ar two question .
given a juri size , and a convict threshold , rememb the vote typic is go to be by a major vote .
what is the probabl that a guilti person is acquit ?
under these condit , what is the probabl that an innoc person is convict ?
laplac , natur enough , given hi , hi idea in probabl , put togeth a chanc mechan to try to model the set .
he model juror respons as essenti chanc driven .
but , he view the intrins guilt or innoc of the defend as a pure chanc variabl , equal like to be on or the other .
thi creat issu and complic .
and , thi wa pick upon by poisson .
we should come to poisson's model next .
poisson start investig and think about civil and crimin trial , and juri system in franc in the 1830s .
and he object to the laplacian idea that a defend should be equal presum to be guilti , or innoc .
poisson then introduc a two paramet model , the first of which wa a paramet captur the guilt , or innoc of the accus .
suppos then , that an accus individu is guilti a proport theta of the time .
theta is the probabl that the person in the dock is guilti .
in the technic languag , we can think of theta as regovern by a bernoulli variabl , zed , which take valu <num> with probabl theta , and <num> with probabl <num> minu theta .
zed then , is an indic of guilt .
when it is <num> , the person is guilti .
when it's <num> , the person is innoc .
poisson wa acut awar that theta should not be consid fix for all time .
that in a tranquil societi , on might well anticip that theta , the probabl of guilt , is bigger than a half .
presum in a tranquil , well order societi , prosecutor don't just drag strai innoc peopl , and throw them at the merci of the court .
in other word , there's a presumpt that due process wa serv , that the prosecutor brought peopl up befor the court for good , and suffici reason on the basi of valid suspicion .
but of cours , in turbul time like the french revolut , thi mai not be the case .
and in case like that , you could have theta less than on half which signal a much more chaotic societi , where individu ar drag to the court willi nilli .
so , here is on paramet , a paramet theta which at least at the time at which the court decis ar be made , should be consid to be fix at least temporarili .
it's a paramet of the problem .
normal , it should help , it is larger than on half .
the second paramet wa , of cours , the laplacian paramet , that juror decis base on the evid present to them ar not alwai certain .
that juri can make mistak .
let p repres the probabl that a juror err , make an error .
doe not evalu the data in front of him properli .
again , technic , we can think of label , or tag an error through an error indic , a random variabl x , which repres a bernoulli trial with a success probabl p .
x is <num> if an error wa made , <num> if an error is not made .
in a well order system , and in well select juri , on would hope that p is less than on half .
a juror is more like to get it right than to get it wrong .
of cours , the quantiti p could vari from juri to juri .
but as a matter of model , in a sanit world , we could imagin that p is essenti fix for the veneer , or the pool from which the juri is drawn .
a factor here is that the evaluatori capabl of the juror is consid to be independ of the guilt , or innoc of the accus .
so , you have two paramet specifi independ of each other .
now , let us sai , where thi kind of model will take us in 19th centuri franc .
in the year between <num> to <num> , juri in franc were compris of <num> individu , and convict requir a vote to convict from a strict major from at least seven of the juror .
we now have a principl set , a sanit bottl in which we can queri the efficaci of juri verdict .
so , to begin , what is the probabl space for juri verdict ?
i imagin it's , the year ar between <num> and <num> , we have a juri of size <num> , and a defend who's accus .
the defend is either guilti , or not guilti .
thi is a paramet zed , an indic variabl zed , which indic guilt , or innoc .
all right .
the theta here is go to be captur the efficaci of the prosecutori system , how well law enforc work in a given countri at a given time .
now , bear in mind that the juri ar not a priori cogniz of the guilt or the innoc .
so , the valu of zed the guilt or the innoc , is known , to , let's sai , the an oracl who is establish the , the ground rule for thi chanc game .
the oracl sai guilti or innoc .
and then , the juror hear evid .
and there ar <num> juror , and each of them come to a decis , either correct or incorrect , natur enough .
let's tag whether the juror made an error or not , by a sequenc of indic variabl x1 , x2 , x3 , through x12 .
for each of the <num> juror and what do these variabl indic ?
well , zed indic whether the person is guilti or innoc .
x1 through x12 indic whether juror <num> through <num> made an error or not .
what is the natur probabl measur ?
clearli now we have a set where it is natur to posit repeat independ trial .
zed is of a lowli variabl .
a guilt indic with a success probabl theta .
each of the xs ar bernoulli variabl , error indic with success probabl p .
of cours , we're view the success of a coin toss , in a rather pervert and twist wai .
success for zed mean the person is guilti , success for the xs mean that the juror made mistak , but no matter .
it's a coin toss .
and natur model here is to posit that these ar all independ trial .
now , it is not unreason , perhap , to posit the independ of the zed from the axi .
guilt or innoc versu the abil of a juror to logic and coher evalu inform data present to them .
the xs , well , if on postul there ar differ peopl with differ mindset and independ faculti , then again , we have a natur notion that the xs ar independ .
the assumpt here of cours is that thei ar share a common error probabl p .
now , if we start write down the probabl measur for the exampl , now we've got a list of <num> on and zero which repres guilt or innoc follow by error or correct decis .
from here , natur a major of vote simpli tabul the vote of the juror .
and so a natur question then is how mani error ar made by the juri as a whole ?
well , thi is , of cours , simpli a sum of x1 through x12 .
each x is a <num> , precis when that juror make a mistak .
and so , the sum of the xs tell you how mani juror ar in error .
thi , if you recal is what we call , s subscript <num> , a sum of <num> term .
and becaus we're ad bernoulli trial , the result is go to be a binomi distribut character by <num> toss of a coin whose success probabl is p .
to summar , the guilt indic zed is a bernoulli variabl .
it take valu <num> with probabl theta , <num> with probabl <num> minu theta .
the xs ar independ juror error indic , we take valu <num> with probabl p , hopefulli less than on half , and take valu <num> , if thei make a right decis , with probabl <num> minu p , hopefulli bigger than on half .
and the number of juror error conform to a binomi distribut .
in annot , the mass function of the binomi is denot b with a subscript <num> for the number of trial .
the success number , k , the number of error made , and the success of the coin toss , p .
okai , we now have a probabl measur .
we know it's a product measur .
what ar the relev event of interest here ?
natur enough there ar two that you need to focu on .
the first , the fundament question , is the accus guilti or innoc ?
let g repres the event that the defend is guilti .
let i , the compliment of g , natur , repres the event that the accus is innoc .
there ar two fundament , link event .
what els can you think about ?
well , natur whether the interv juror's convict or not .
let c denot the event that the individu is convict by the juri .
recal for convict , the juri need seven or more vote to convict .
and let a , the complement of c , denot the event , that the accus is acquit .
now , rememb , of cours , an event is a subset of the sampl space .
the sampl space is a list of bernoulli variabl .
a guilt indic and <num> error indic .
what is the event g ?
well , g occur precis when the indic variabl zed is <num> .
it is independ of the choic the juror make .
therefor , all sequenc which begin with a <num> would be precis the event that we call g .
and of cours , the event that we call i , that the accus is innoc refer to all sequenc in thi chanc experi which begin with a <num> .
what about the event c that an accus is convict ?
now , recal that in a juri process , convict is by a major .
and you need an outright major vote to convict , to be abl to convict a , that individu .
well , there ar two case here .
what if the individu were actual guilti ?
and of cours the juror don't know thi ahead of time .
right ?
thei ar go to make decis base on the evid present to them .
but suppos the evid is present about an individu who wa guilti .
in thi case , a convict will happen if there ar fewer than <num> error in decis .
if a juror get it right then he will properli have conclud that the individu is guilti .
so as long as the number of juror who get it wrong who conclud that he is innoc is <num> or fewer , then he'll have a major of <num> or more juror who agre that he is guilti and the person will be convict .
and therefor , in the case when the individu , the accus is guilti , convict occur when the sum <num> , the number of juri error is no more than <num> .
what about if the innoc , the individu ar innoc ?
now , in thi case , convict will occur if <num> or more juror get it wrong .
if the individu is innoc , and if seven or more juror conclud that he is guilti , then , in fact , he will be convict .
and therefor , in the case when the individu at hand is innoc , convict occur when the sum of juror error is <num> or more .
of cours now we can readili transcrib thi into what kind of sampl point fit these criteria ?
at thi point now we're equip to begin an analysi of the problem .
and we shall turn to thi next .
to proce , we begin by abstract the underli problem .
so imagin we have a larg popul .
and we abstract it by draw let's sai , a box of orang urn , and the element of the popul , peopl , creatur , widget , we abstract awai as ball of on of two color .
so now we have a dichotom popul in thi case , an urn with orang ball and blue ball .
the fundament question is the follow .
what fraction , sai p , of the ball in thi urn ar orang ?
the moment i understand thi , i understand how the sub popul ar distribut in the underli popul .
now , how would on go about estim thi ?
well , natur enough , on wai to do thi is to simpli make an exhaust count of everi singl ball into the popul .
count everybodi in the gener popul and examin who is of type orang and who is of type blue .
if on did thi for the figur at hand you'd find there ar <num> ball in total , of which <num> ar orang .
but of cours thi get rapidli weari , and in a larg popul thi becom unwork on a routin basi , right ?
for instanc , in a polit set , look at the persuas of everi individu in the countri is essenti what we call a gener elect .
but of cours on can't run a gener elect everi year , or even everi other year .
so in such set we still wish to understand how the sub popul ar split up .
in polit thi becom import to understand what kind of legisl should be pass , which is repres for the popul .
in the environ , it becom import to understand the extent to which we have an invas speci spread into a nativ domain , and so on .
it is natur now , if we can't count everybodi in the popul , to queri what happen if we sampl randomli from the popul ?
so let's consid what happen if we take a random select x from the popul i've given you .
now the element could be an orang ball .
now what ar the chanc on draw an orang ball if on select at random from the whole popul ?
well there ar <num> ball , as i've inform you , of which <num> ar orang , and therefor the chanc , the probabl of select an orang ball is <num> over <num> and so , p is approxim <num> . <num> .
the chanc of select a blue ball likewis is <num> out of <num> , and that's about <num> . <num> .
now what is kei here is thi .
the proport p is fix .
it's <num> . <num> but it is a priori unknown to us .
and what we would like to do , is what we would dearli love to do , is to be abl to estim p accur , without have recours to count everybodi in the popul .
natur from here , we think about sampl repeatedli and independ from the popul .
let's abstract out the whole pictur now .
you see it doe not align popul with element of two flavor , orang and blue to begin with .
well , we could think of thi abstractli as some collect of object that proport p of which is orang , and of proport q , <num> minu p of which , is blue .
now , name orang and blue here , republican democrat , python allig , ar just name .
as far as the estim problem is concern , thei ar irrelev .
we might as well simplifi annot , and the wai we comput it , by call the element of on type the number <num> .
the element of the other type , the number <num> .
now , what doe a random sampl look like ?
well , a random sampl could be either of type <num> , or it could be of type <num> .
in other word , pick a random element is equival to the toss of a metaphor coin .
now , what's differ here is we're toss a coin .
it ha got a certain bia toward success p .
but we do not a priori know what p is .
our estim problem is given the coin to determin what p is .
now , there's some nomenclatur which goe with thi and there's some histori which goe with thi and we should take stock of thi .
the first thorough examin of sequenc of coin toss wa undertaken by jacob bernoulli .
the patriarch of the bernoulli clan , mai perhap the most famou clan in mathemat , and hi work wa publish posthum seven year after he di in <num> .
and the work wa call the ar conjectandi , the art of conjectur , and in it bernoulli flush out the mysteri of coin toss to a hitherto unimagin level .
and so from that point on we have call coin toss bernoulli trial .
and so here is anoth name or a sequenc of name for the underli experi .
select an individu at random from the popul when the popul is dichotom correspond to flip a metaphor coin with a fix but unknown success probabl , p .
we will call such a coin flip a bernoulli trial with success probabl p .
we will denot it , the outcom of thi trial by a letter x .
x is a chanc variabl .
it's go to take on of two valu <num> or <num> , orang or blue .
with probabl p and <num> minu p respect and from now on in thi context we will alwai write <num> minu p to be q .
here now is a set .
sampl from an underli popul is equival to the toss of a coin .
now , how do we go about determin what the buyer might have to pai ?
well natur enough , we sampl repeatedli .
okai , and so let's move on and consid a set where instead of a singl sampl , we sampl repeatedli from the popul .
of cours , the sampl is with replac and is independ and is bia free .
what's bia free ?
connot in thi context is that in principl , i can pick ani on in the popul .
all element be equal like .
thi of cours make sure that i'm not select from on segment of the popul or some other narrow region of the popul .
we select from the whole popul becaus i want to sai someth about the popul as a whole .
natur enough , i'd like a sampl to be with replac , becaus otherwis i'm dilut the popul and the underli proport will chang from step to step .
to avoid thi , we make sure sampl is with replac , and , of cours we want a sampl to be independ .
so we now have the context that we ar veri familiar with , that of repeat independ trial .
and thi is the simplest of those set , the repeat toss of a coin .
now , if we toss a coin repeatedli , in thi case , i've shown you what happen if we toss it <num> time .
then we get a sequenc of outcom , 1s and 0s , success and failur , orang and blue .
here's a particular list of a sequenc of success and failur , <num> repres a failur , <num> repres a success .
now for thi particular sequenc , we've sampl from the popul <num> time .
we've got a particular sequenc of element in the popul .
of the sequenc we ar interest in ask how mani ar of type <num> ?
how mani ar orang ?
and a simpl count show there ar exactli four 1s in that sequenc , out of how mani ?
well , out of <num> .
and therefor , the frequenc of type <num> in the sequenc i have drawn is <num> in <num> or <num> in <num> .
now you mai recal that in the origin popul that had start with of ball in the urn , there were <num> ball and <num> orang ball .
and therefor the proport of orang ball is about . <num> .
we now get on third in thi particular sampl .
now that's pretti close to <num> . <num> .
i wonder if thi is a more gener phenomenon .
so our fundament question is the follow .
ar the subpopul proport in the sampl that we have select , repres of the subpopul proport in the entir popul ?
would thi be the case ?
well , on the face of it , thi doe not look veri promis .
imagin , if you ar , if you like , a larg underli popul , sai of a countri , divid into two group .
that's a veri larg popul , mayb <num> million , <num> million , per , perhap <num> billion peopl .
a typic poll , if you look at a newspap , will look at someth like the order of <num> , <num> individu , if we ar lucki .
why should the proport in <num> , <num> individu have anyth whatsoev to sai about a popul which is <num> million time larger , a popul of the size <num> billion ?
thi doesn't sound reason at all , but perhap we should examin thi a littl bit further to see what we can glean from thi structur .
so , let's immedi abstract awai the underli problem .
i'm go to start with a dichotom popul , on of the mani type i've shown you , or that you could imagin .
i'm go to abstract awai the process of random select from the popul by the metaphor toss of a coin .
in oth , in other word , a bernoulli trial with a coin , whose bia p toward success , is fix , but sadli , unhappili , unknown .
we're go to toss thi coin repeatedli a finit number of time .
how mani time ?
well , ineluct of cours n time , what els would you call it ?
we'd like to have some gener number of trial and then see what happen as the number of trial increas .
so in other word , we now have a sequenc of coin flip bernoulli trial x1 through xn .
each of them take valu , <num> and <num> , bias toward <num> with probabl p , bias toward <num> with probabl q .
of cours , the coin flip ar independ .
thi constitut the raw data of a poll .
out of thi , we abstract first , the number of element in the poll in the sampl of type <num> .
let's give it a name .
the number of element of type <num> can be obtain by simpli ad the xs from left to right .
of cours , everi time an x is a <num> it ha no contribut to the sum .
and when an x is <num> , it give you exactli <num> to the sum .
and therefor , the sum of x1 through xn will be exactli repres of the number of 1s , or the number of success .
we call thi , natur , the accumul number of success in a sequenc of bernoulli trial .
let's give it a name , s for sum , and us a subscript n to remind ourselv that you're sum over n trial .
so s sub n repres the accumul success in n toss of a bias coin .
how doe a basic question get reflect into thi mathemat substructur ?
well veri simpli .
the fraction 1s in the sampl is sn , divid by n .
in our exampl , we had n wa <num> , sn wa <num> .
and so the fraction wa <num> divid by <num> .
and our basic question is , is sn divid by n a good approxim to the fix but unknown p ?
let us first turn to the probabl that an accus individu is actual convict by a <num> member juri .
in notat , we want a probabl of the event c .
natur enough , we look to decompos the problem , and a natur partit is immedi suggest .
base upon whether the individu is guilti or innoc .
and therefor by condit on whether thei ar guilti or innoc , we can simpli decompos the probabl of convict .
of cours , the less now will recogn and appeal to the theorem of total probabl .
addit ha come to the fore .
the moment you write such an express down , it now becom almost transpar .
the probabl of guilt is just the probabl that the indic z of guilt is <num> .
but if , the person is guilti then convict occur if the number of juror error doe not exce <num> .
juri decis ar independ of guilt or independ and therefor now we have the first term .
the probabl that as <num> doesn't exce <num> , time the probabl of guilt .
the second term , likewis , if the individu is innoc , then z is <num> .
and , if the individu is innoc , convict occur , if and onli if the number of juror error is <num> or more .
again , juri decis ar independ of guilt or innoc .
and now we're all set becaus we know that z is a bernoulli variabl .
it's got a probabl theta of success , a probabl <num> minu theta of failur .
and as <num> is a binomi variabl , what paramet's <num> , the number of trial , the number of juror .
and success probabl p , the probabl a juror make an error .
and so we simpli by ductil , accumul binomi probabl and write down an express .
the first term , the first sum tell you the probabl of make <num> or fewer juror error .
the second sum is , catch the probabl of <num> of more juror error , in the two case of guilt and innoc .
now , of cours , we could expand out the binomi probabl , the atom probabl in term of the binomi coeffici , and so on .
but that is not necessari for our purpos at thi time , we could alwai go back and put in place the algebra at need .
we could stop here and sai well we have done the problem , it's done .
thi is in fact the answer .
and we could numer comput thi , there is no argument .
but a littl bit of algebra massag allow us to put thi into a nice and compact form , which also ha got a certain amount of intrus bake in .
and to do thi , we're go to try to merg the two sum togeth .
so , let's begin by look at the binomi probabl in the second sum out .
b <num> of k and p .
the probabl that in <num> toss of a coin with success probabl p , on get k success .
now , let's write down the binomi formul for thi .
what doe it sai ?
it said the binomi probabl is go to be given by <num> choos k .
time success probabl p to the power k , time failur probabl <num> minu p , to the power <num> minu k .
let's do a littl bit of massag first .
first , to the binomi coeffici , and then the two term of the product adjac to it .
now , select k from <num> is exactli the same as select <num> minu k from <num> .
the moment <num> select k , <num> leav side <num> minu k .
it is equival to specifi that <num> minu k .
and therefor , we have two version of the same binomi coeffici .
thei're both complet equal to each other .
and let us plai the follow littl , appar trivial game , exchang the order of the two term of the product , p to the k and <num> minu b to the power <num> minu k as i've shown you .
now it look like i haven't done veri much .
but an examin of the express on the right show us that we've got anoth binomi formul .
thi is a binomi probabl that in <num> toss of a coin who's success probabl is <num> minu p that on attain exactli <num> minu k success .
and therefor , we identifi thi exactli with b <num> of <num> minu k , with a success probabl of <num> minu p .
all thi took wa a rearrang of term .
and we have thi beauti littl symmetri .
let's rewrit our express now , us thi ident .
and so now we've got a first term , and a second term , in term of the binomi probabl , evalu at <num> minu k , and a success probabl of <num> minu p .
let's take a good hard look at the second sum .
k run from <num> through <num> .
as k run from <num> through <num> , <num> minu k run between <num> and <num> .
and so , if we replac <num> minu k by k , then , it is equal to ask k to run from <num> through <num> .
and so we could simpli rewrit the sum as follow , is some k run <num> through <num> of the binomi probabl of correspond to <num> toss of a coin , evalu at k , and success probabl of <num> minu p .
right .
so all we've done is a complet transpar thing here .
replac <num> minu k by k , and then when <num> , and when k wa , the origin sum wa run from <num> through <num> , in the new sum , k would run from <num> through <num> .
that is all would sai .
noth ha chang in the sum .
but now , of cours , the two sum on the right ar run where exactli the same rang .
addit is associ .
we can do it in ani order we like .
let's pull the term togeth and pull the summat out and put everyth els in squar bracket in the middl .
and there you go , a nice and simpl , and compact express .
have done the work , we should see if there's ani intrus here .
whether there's some reason to believ it .
and inde , of cours , there is .
the term in the squar bracket connot exactli the probabl that the defend is convict when the dissent minor ha got exactli k vote , k run from <num> through <num> .
of cours thi mean that the major ha got <num> minu k of at least <num> vote to convict .
here's a nice and simpl , and clean compact express .
of cours on can numer evalu thi if on knew theta and p .
but , let's hold onto that for a moment .
and move to the next question .
'kai .
so , thi is on step in our road .
the deeper question of cours , is the question of error .
we come to that next .
now that we have comput within the model of poisson , the probabl of convict an accus .
our next question and the fundament question , of cours is what ar the chanc of an erron convict or an erron acquitt ?
so let's start first with the probabl of an erron convict .
what doe thi mean ?
well , let's transcrib thi in word .
it mean an individu is innoc and is convict .
and therefor , what we're look for is to write down the probabl of innoc .
condit upon the occurr of the event that the individu is convict .
oh , an atavist target memori might suggest that thi kind of condit probabl argument is familiar .
thi is relat via bay's rule to a chang in direct of condit .
and the moment we write it in thi form , it all fall into place .
their denomin is the probabl that the individu is connect and we have just by dint of some effort by us addit , comput thi in close form in the express on the upper right .
in the numer is the term , which correspond to convict if the individu is innoc .
and thi is exactli the second of the two term , which is compris the sum for the probabl of convict .
and so , in on fell swoop , we can simpli write down the answer .
the second term for innoc divid by the probabl of convict .
the listen should take a moment to write it down and think about it and make sure she ha absorb it .
the express look algebra formid to be sure , but the logic by thi point should be complet transpar .
and as a test of your understand , it would be a good idea to ask whether you can now retrac the step and write down an express for the probabl of an erron acquitt .
paus the lectur , take a moment and see if you can just follow through and see what thei answer might be .
restart the lectur , of cours , when you're readi .
so by an entir similar process , an erron acquitt mean that the individu is guilti , but ha been acquit .
and so we're ask for the probabl of guilt , condit upon acquitt .
thi is an a posteriori probabl , a probabl after the fact .
and follow exactli the same line of argument , we write it through and we find an express veri similar .
in fact , it's a mirror imag of the express abov .
at thi point , now we've got the two fundament driver of error in the juri verdict process .
that the probabl of an erron convict on on hand and the probabl of an erron acquitt on the other .
of cours , the balanc between these is go to depend upon societ sensibl .
what at a given time , in a given societi is felt to be more import of the two ?
but clearli , we would like both of these to be small , but their rel proport , as i've mention it depend .
but there's still a block here .
how in these express , doe on actual comput them ?
we do not know theta and p a breweri .
and how do we actual determin theta and p ?
the theta , the probabl of guilt is a paramet of the model .
we don't know thi a priori .
p , the probabl that a juror of a particular veneer , a particular group of potenti juror make error .
hopefulli , theta is bigger than half , at least in a tranquil and stabl societi .
hopefulli , p is less than half .
hopefulli , much less than on half in a well chosen juri system .
but how doe on actual determin these paramet ?
now to understand thi , we now need some more theta and so let's go back to poisson's data .
in the year <num> to <num> , the outcom of juri trial were avail and thi is an abbrevi list .
the origin list actual had more detail .
it had addit inform on that whether the accus wa for a crime against a person or for a crime against properti and so on , but here is a compact list .
it show the number of accus in the year between <num> to <num> , when juri trial compris <num> individu with a major of at least seven be need to convict .
and here is the number of convict per year .
us thi as , as data , we can go back to the model and try to estim the paramet theta at p .
an object immedi aris , becaus you realiz we have binomi probabl .
so we have power of p and that's go to make these calcul difficult .
poisson found ingeni wai of simplifi calcul .
and found out and he , as he note , there wa a remark stabil across these year in term of convict rate in term of , in term of the probabl of guilt .
and poisson estim from these data , that theta wa about <num> . <num> .
that about two third of individu who were accus were actual guilti , while p wa about on fourth .
the probabl that a juror make mistak wa on in four , three out of four time the juror make correct decis .
so we have now , at least in princip a wai forward .
we've got a formal model .
if on ha data , then on can go back to the data and estim paramet of the model and then we can us the model to test new data .
thi sound promis and good .
of cours , i've left out detail here .
in those year in franc between <num> to <num> , if a juri had a major of seven for convict , then the case actual went to a higher court .
which would again examin the data and then come out with a decis and possibl overturn the origin decis .
poisson actual cleverli us such case to provid secondari check on hi estim .
follow <num> , between the year <num> , <num> , franc move to a <num> member juri system where now it , a major of <num> wa need to convict .
and of cours , there were data for that as well and poisson analyz that data as well .
all of thi suggest there is a principl methodolog here , where on can setup the probabl of error in juri verdict .
the question now , of cours is what is the proper size of juri ?
and what super major doe on need ?
what is optim ?
and so to do thi , we want to promptli gener what we have .
so here ar the express we've comput .
the probabl of erron convict when you have a juri of size <num> with the major of <num> need for convict and the probabl of erron acquitt .
suppos now , we abstract the problem .
and we sai , suppos we have a juri of n individu .
why n ?
becaus it is inconceiv that i us anyth els for an algebra variabl .
and suppos we need a major , let's sai , m individu to convict .
in our exampl from franc from <num> to <num> , n wa <num> and m wa <num> .
how mani of these express chang ?
well , all we need to do is go in and strike out sundri refer to <num> by n and sundri refer to <num> or <num> minu <num> by n minu n .
and that's all there is to it , bob's your uncl .
and so , our first express becom an appar more complic express , involv n and m .
our second express again , replac <num> by n and <num> by m minu n becom thi .
and there you have it , we now have a formal model .
now test such model is difficult and perhap , it's a sad commentari on the rate at which societi progress .
that in late 20th centuri america , the amount of data , the type of data avail wa not realli veri differ from what wa avail in nineteenth centuri franc .
so , in the intermedi period of a <num> year , we still have essenti the same kind of system and the same kind of data .
veri littl further progress actual ha been made .
so perhap , there's a littl commentari on the evolut of societi in time .
and we can us thi as a start point to analyz juri system and juri verdict , but our purpos here ar slightli differ .
for our purpos , thi problem of juri select and the valid of juri verdict , the justic of juri verdict wa us in establish a context .
the stori wa nice and color to be sure .
it allow us to realli examin the binomi distribut in a meati context and to resurrect idea from independ and condit probabl and which allow us to get a clean review of these principl .
let us leav thi for the time be .
move on , becaus at heart here is now a new question .
the binomi probabl in , ineluct get fold into these express .
how doe on actual evalu these probabl ?
how doe on evalu such sum , even if on know the paramet ?
thi lead or lead to a discoveri poisson made in <num> and that is the subject of our next mini lectur and the subject of thi tableau as a whole .
a curiou discoveri of poisson .
now recal that juri verdict probabl were given in term of the binomi distribut .
and there wa thi question about how on comput these probabl .
you should bear in mind the time , it wa earli in the 19th centuri .
and to comput a binomi probabl by hand wa go to be moder unpleas .
so there wa a comput question .
of cours , these question ar moot todai becaus even the simplest of our handheld devic can chew up calcul like thi in a trice .
but in the 19th centuri , calcul , comput , wa actual realli a seriou question .
poisson went ahead and analyz hi express us the law of error , what we todai call the central limit theorem .
and thi will be our conclud tableau .
but along the wai , he note as a curios .
a curiou littl approxim to the binomi which could in principl be us to simplifi the calcul of these binomi probabl .
thi wa good to have unexpect and subtl effect .
so , let's start with a set .
rememb thi is about a juri model .
and p repres the probabl that a juror made an error .
natur , we hope that p is a small number .
in the context of coin toss then we ar think about toss a coin which is veri heavili weight toward failur .
a failur here mean a correct decis .
all right .
slightli twist languag , i know , but there it is .
so if p is small then we'll requir veri mani toss of thi coin befor on see a success , a head , an error .
thi is a provinc of rare event , so natur we're now think about a set where p is , is small posit number .
and n is suffici larg .
in thi domain , we recal the expect number of success for the binomi wa n time p .
the number of trial time the success probabl .
if p is small and n is larg then n time p could be a moder number .
let us call that by the greek letter lambda .
so , the set is the follow .
i want to evalu binomi probabl where p is small , n is larg , and the product n time p , or lambda , is a moder number for vari success .
so let us fix k .
okai .
zero , on , two , three , four and so on .
fix that and think of a larg n and a small p .
now the binomi probabl have got two part to their express .
on , a binomi coeffici and then a power of <num> minu p .
let's take them individu .
first , the binomi coeffici time a power of p .
now , what is the binomi coeffici ?
well , n choos k is n to the k follow over k factori , or write it out n time n minu <num> time n minu <num> through n minu k plu <num> .
in other word , start at n and go through k term each on less than the previou term .
the whole divid by k factori and then multipli by p to the power k .
each of the term in the numer of the fraction is veri close to n .
rememb , n is a big number , k is some fix number .
so when you take awai a small fix number from a larg number , you're still go to get essenti a larg number .
each of those term is essenti n let reinforc it by pull out a factor n from each of the term in the product and the numer .
so you have n , then if you pull out n from n minu <num> , you get n time <num> minu <num> over n , then you pull out n from n minu <num> .
you get n time <num> minu <num> over n .
and so on down , you pull out n from the last turn , you get n time <num> minu k minu <num> over n .
so , how mani n's have you pull out ?
well there ar a total of k n's in the numer , k term in the numer , and each of them ha contribut on term n , and so we get n to the power k .
combin that with p to the power k and write it as simpli n time p to the power k , and now we've got an express .
n time p , the mean or the expect valu of the binomi to the power k , over k factori , time a bunch of correct term in wrong bracket .
but here is the point .
each of the correct term defer to <num> by a veri small amount , in a reciproc of n .
rememb , n is larg .
and therefor , each of those k term is veri close to <num> .
you multipli them out , you get someth els , which is veri close to <num> .
and sinc n time p , we're call lambda , the entir product evolv into someth like lambda to the power k over k factori .
so here now , the entir binomi coeffici is simplifi into a much simpler form .
a power of lambda divid by k factori .
we ar half wai there .
now let's take a look at what remain in the express for the binomi probabl .
<num> minu p to the power n minu k .
the rule of expon tell us that when you have x to the power a plu b , we can write it as x to the power a time x to the power b .
identifi x with <num> minu p , a with n and b with minu k , and we've got a rule of product .
in the first term on the right , <num> minu p to the power n .
recal that p is simpli lambda divid by n , or lambda is n time p .
and therefor , rewrit it as <num> minu lambda over n to the power n , time <num> minu p to the power minu k .
now , the second of the two term , rememb p is veri tini , so <num> minu p is veri close to <num> .
and it , take a number veri close to <num> and take a power of it , you would get someth veri close to <num> .
<num> minu p to the power of minu k is approxim <num> , for small p .
what about the first term ?
oh , it might be a faint atavist tug in your memori bank , perhap from your first calculu class or your pre calculu class .
<num> minu lambda over n to the power n .
and the lambda is a moder number .
n is a larg number .
thi express is an approxim for e to the power minu lambda .
in fact , we could us it as a definit of the exponenti function .
and therefor , we get e to the power minu lambda time <num> approxim , or simpli e to the power minu lambda .
everyth is simplifi glorious .
the binomi probabl of k success in n trial with a success probabl of p , is approxim given by lambda to the power k over k factori time a to the power minu lambda .
all right , a new student , a neophyt , might well be pardon for be skeptic about thi , thi strang algebra maneuv .
so , what have we accomplish ?
well i've got a , a messi thing , and i replac it by some other messi thing .
but someth import ha been accomplish .
take a look at new , at the binomi probabl on the left .
it , for a given k , is determin by two paramet n and p .
and each of the term is not easi to comput , especi by hand .
and choos case complic .
it take effort .
and you have variou power of p and <num> minu p .
on the right , we have a singl paramet lambda .
our entir express is approxim determin by a singl paramet .
and thi is go to have deep consequ .
we should promptli rush it and put in some nomenclatur , some terminolog to captur thi .
on the right , i've got an atom mass attach to k .
a probabl that sum design chanc experi take valu k .
it is complet determin by on real paramet , a posit number , lambda , which is fix onc the paramet n and p ar known .
let's call thi the poisson probabl .
po for poisson , of k emerg in a chanc experi with a hidden paramet lambda .
now thi all look veri esoter to be sure .
but , as a first question , you sai well , mayb poisson had to do someth with thi .
but sure todai , we have access to comput devic .
what do we care ?
we can just threw in a binomi probabl into the machin and outcom and answer .
the answer is go to be at least two fold .
and the first part of it is simpli the follow realiz .
an express like thi alreadi give us a lot of inform that we were not privi too earlier .
what thi tell us is that a varieti of binomi express , a varieti of binomi experi with differ n's and p's will give rise to similar probabl as long as the product n time p is a constant .
so , a whole slew of binomi express , all give rise to similar chanc outcom .
that is an import realiz .
the second question that might aris at thi point is , well , we've wave our hand around and done thi algebra approxim , how good ar thei ?
we could approach thi in a coupl of wai .
on is we could try to make a formal limit out of thi and try to provid explicit express for the error we make in such an approxim .
and that can be done , but we won't bother .
we'll simpli appeal to a numer evid to see that thi actual give us convinc result .
so here is a test of the qualiti of the approxim of poisson .
start of the binomi probabl correspond to two paramet n and p .
let the number of success , k , run from <num> through , sai , <num> .
allow n to rang of suitabl larg number .
in thi case , i pick <num> , <num> and <num> as my larg number .
allow p to rang from <num> . <num> , <num> . <num> and <num> . <num> .
<num> , <num> and <num> in three case , respect .
the number ar chosen that n time p is a fix valu <num> .
thi is my lambda .
so in each of the three case , n is <num> , p is <num> . <num> .
n is <num> , p is <num> . <num> , n is <num> and p is <num> . <num> .
we have n time p equal to lambda equal to <num> .
so , n is larg , p is small , lambda is a moder number .
the poisson probabl that you call po of k , parametr by lambda and given by lambda to the k over k factori time e to the minu lambda .
and here's a tabl of valu .
and even cursori examin show that the approxim ar get quit remark good , even for these rel small valu of n .
we could , at thi point , creat a test of a hypothesi .
but we'll not bother .
at a high level , all we will need is to sai , if we ar in the provinc of rare event where the coin toss ha got a small probabl of success , p .
then if there ar enough trial , if the coin's toss enough time , then the binomi probabl ar approxim govern by poisson probabl .
the approxim is quit remark good , even for small valu of n .
now the listen is , could well be pardon for sai all right , thi is all well and good .
so you give a neg approxim , so what ?
is there ani consequ to thi ?
it's a bit esoter .
is it actual us ?
and inde it is .
and here's where the util of poisson's approxim suddenli start becom appar .
it took a long time .
poisson himself didn't , thought it wa a curios .
he dispens with it in on page in hi , in hi book .
and he realli didn't do much with it .
it took about <num> year after that for the first applic to start arriv .
and todai , i've given you a laundri list of possibl rang from the trivial absurd to the veri rich and deep and portent .
for exampl , if you have a collect of peopl , what ar the chanc , what is the probabl that , sai , three of them ar born on new year's dai ?
well , we can think about be born on new year's dai as toss a coin whose success probabl is on in <num> .
each individu toss their coin to get their birthdai and now we ar ask what is the probabl of three success ?
and if , let's sai , we have an assemblag of <num> or <num> , <num> peopl , it is quit larg , p is <num> over <num> , it's veri small .
we ar now in fertil ground for a poisson approxim .
or perhap slightli more frivol sai on ha a birthdai .
and on's love on make a birthdai cake and becaus you're fond of raisin thei put in some raisin .
but sadli thei didn't put enough , enough raisin .
suppos you cut the cake into veri mani thin wedg .
what ar the chanc that the wedg you get contain a raisin ?
think of a raisin fall into a wedg as a rare event if there ar few raisin and mani wedg .
again we have a promis ground for a poisson approxim to a binomi .
misprint in a book .
on a given page there ar a larg number of word , and a word mai occasion be misspel .
there would , could be a typograph error .
if the publish is reput and the qualiti of the book is good on doe not expect veri mani error in the book .
if that is the case then each word is an error but a small chanc , there ar rel few error in the whole book .
the chanc of a word be in error is a rare event .
we have a lot of word in the page and again we have fertil ground for a poisson approxim .
on a slightli more seriou level , manufactur defect .
clearli a manufactur can not toler a larg number of defect , otherwis custom will flock awai from him .
so presum , defect constitut rare effect .
what ar the distribut of these rare effect ?
of cours , defect in critic place could have veri seriou effect .
so to analyz thi we need to proper probabilist model , and again , a poisson approxim give us a good start point .
a kei discoveri of the late 19th centuri and the earli 20th centuri wa the discov , discoveri of radioact decai .
what govern the behavior of elementari particl ?
and in , for exampl , a posit where a radioact element decai , give up alpha and beta particl , what is the distribut of the number of particl that is observ ?
and again , we ar in the provinc of rare event if you're think of low level of radioact .
similarli , look at the number of photon emit by a photon gun in a low light environ .
and again , we ar as provinc .
accid .
what can on sai about the frequenc of accid on a given stretch of highwai ?
again , presum , accid ar rare .
we ar deal with rare event and we have a poisson approxim .
queue and arriv process .
what govern arriv of individu to a queue for a movi which is highli anticip ?
to the open of a new bookstor ?
i understand bookstor ar quaint these dai , but in on , at on time peopl did go to bookstor .
arriv of packet to an internet server .
now again we're think of a set where the event might not be rare anymor , but thei seem to captur the flavor of what happen in a poisson approxim .
thi turn out to have veri rich and deep consequ in the theori of queue and transport , in telecommun .
and in astrophys , in the distribut of star and , and the cosmo .
again , think of the format of a star as a rare event in the vast immens of space .
so , poisson's observ , hi curiou approxim turn out to have unexpect rich , rich consequ .
we'll now spend some time look at some of these applic in greater depth to see how well thi kind of model fit the realiti .
some weird and wonder observ fit the poisson distribut .
poisson himself thought of hi discoveri as a littl curios , a littl idea by wai and appar , did not realli us it veri much .
the first person who put poisson's observ to good us wa von bortkewitsch , who in <num> publish an intriguingli titl book which translat into the law of small number .
it , thi is a curiou book .
you will find in it analysi of suicid rate in children , among women , fatal , death .
mayb there wa morbid streak in hi makeup .
but , on absurdli remark applic that he focus on and that ha receiv a lot of attent sinc , is of fatal of the larg prussian armi of the late 19th centuri .
where peopl di as a consequ of be kick by their hors .
hei , let's take a look at what von bortkewitsch actual look at .
so , he follow <num> armi core for a period of <num> year from <num> to <num> .
now , each armi core ha got a larg conting of troop in it .
and if you forward them for <num> year , you have <num> time <num> or <num> armi corp year .
and each year you have on particular armi corp in that year .
you have a lot of individu in the corp , and there ar mani hors .
there ar mani opportun for be kick and to die .
okai .
so here , sexist mean we're get kick and dy .
it's a littl morbid , a littl macabr .
but , if thi is the case then within each core year , you have someth like a binomi distribut .
a larg number of individu .
a small chanc p , hopefulli , of get kick by a hors and die .
and he find that , in that period , over <num> armi corp year , there were <num> fatal , which translat into lambda equal to <num> over <num> , or about <num> fatal per armi corp year .
so , approxim on person , in each armi corp in a given year , di .
all right , now , what other data is a part of thi ?
well , here we go .
so , you have a tabl , a tabl in front of you where on the left you have the number of death per corp year .
the death , column k , zero , on , two , three , four , five , and so on .
here , the observ frequenc ar <num> armi corp , corp year , had no death .
that corp on that year had no on di .
<num> armi corp year exhibit on death .
<num> exhibit two death and so on .
okai , if you think of these as , a set where we have rare event .
the chanc of get been kick by a hors and dy is small .
armi corp have got larg number of individu in them .
we've got someth that a binomi distribut govern it .
and thi is approxim by poisson distribut .
and what ar the paramet of the distribut ?
well , it's in lambda .
lambda is <num> .
if , in fact , the death were govern by these probabl , with these frequenc , these poisson probabl .
then , the expect number of unequ year with no death would be <num> , the total number of corp year , time the correspond poisson probabl .
and that is list on the third column .
and on thing that'll immedi strike you is how remark good the fit is .
of cours , thi doe open up question about how on test for good as to fit .
we will come to that a littl bit later .
for our purpos now , thi show us a beauti effect of the poisson approxim to the data .
our next exampl is in broadcast authent .
i should set the stage by tell you about the set .
comput commun came of ag in the late 1970s .
and origin call the arpanet the network wa design to commun between comput across a few institut .
everyth wa well and good as long as you just had naiv academ well mean to be sure who were commun with each other issu of transfer transpar .
but of cours the moment a larger commun get involv secur and fast becom more difficult to verifi .
the earli issu in the 70s were two fold .
how could on guarante the integr of on's commun and how could on guarante the confidenti of on's commun ?
in other word , how doe on ensur that a third parti doe not spoof on pretend to be somebodi els ?
in other word , the integr of the commun is maintain .
and how doe on ensur that a third parti doe not eavesdrop on a privat convers ?
now , these issu ar solv by a beauti number theoret method which provid cryptograph protect .
so todai if you get at a websit and you go to a secur websit to make for exampl a financi transact and you see the word http .
appear on a browser that will signal to you that your transact is be protect from pry ey .
and that an , a nefari individu can't insert themselv into the loop and pretend to be you .
so thi is a measur of cryptograph protect , what it doe is it provid guarante of confidenti and integr of inform , at a cost .
the cost is in term of the comput that have to be perform by the receiv to verifi the bonafid of the transmitt .
thing went good through the 80s until the commun explos realli explod with the develop of the internet in <num> .
and at thi stage a new secur threat becam appar .
and we discov to our chagrin that our protocol in our system wa not realli well equip to handl thi new threat .
thi threat is call a denial of servic threat to the system .
an attack and a variou individu find thei ar cryptograph block from spoof or from eavesdrop .
so thei're cryptograph block from affect the integr or the confidenti of the commun .
but thei decid that no matter thei will simpli overwhelm a server by send a flood of messag .
we're just spuriou which the server requir time and effort to verifi and discard .
but if you send enough the server run out of comput resourc and crash .
and exampl of denial of servic attack have been in the new over the last decad .
major corpor even countri have been attack by third parti .
thi is a difficult strateg and secur threat to handl partli becaus our infrastructur wa not design with these threat in mind .
fortun , there ar avenu .
step on can take to mitig such threat and a kei here is to understand that the need of an attack and the need of a legitim client ar fundament differ .
the attack is look to take down a server , a countri , a larg corpor , a govern .
for hi attack to work the comput which receiv the inform must process a larg chunk of what he send .
if on can discard a larg chunk of what he send then you end up defin the attack and so here's a veri simpl strategi .
in a random wai , there's card packet that arriv at your door and keep let's sai , onli a small fraction p of those packet .
if you did thi for exampl is p is point on then you accept onli on in ten packet randomli select , .
and so the attack can't gain the system and in on fell swoop you discard <num> of the attack packet .
if you can handl <num> of the attack's attack then you're in busi , right ?
your competit load is now under control .
so here is a veri simpl wai of reduc the intens of an attack .
simpli discard stuff , of cours thi come at a cost becaus you discard not just spuriou attack packet but legitim client packet .
now what do the client need ?
the client ha got a sign packet , cryptograph sign which authent him .
he need you to examin on packet .
the attack need you to examin essenti all hi packet .
here's a veri simpl client strategi , send a few copi of your packet .
each copi is examin with sai a chanc of on in ten or more gener probabl p .
but if we chang just a few packet , the chanc of at least on be examin goe up veri , veri quickli .
so for exampl , if p is <num> , <num> of the packet ar discard .
then if n is <num> you just repeat your on packet <num> time rememb the opposit ha sent a billion packet you've sent your on packet <num> time .
<num> of your opposit attack ha been erod and thrown awai .
but of your <num> packet , the chanc that at least on is examin by the receiv to establish a bonafid is now about <num> .
and if you send just <num> packet your chanc of get at least on packet through jump to <num> .
now how doe on do the analysi ?
well , each packet get through or not for you with a small probabl .
it's a rare event , n is moder here but <num> , <num> , <num> .
you're govern by a poi , poisson system approxim .
the probabl that no packet get through is the poisson mass probabl with k equal to zero .
the probabl that at least on packet is accept , by activ on minu the probabl that none ar accept .
and there you go here's a veri veri simpl mechan which can be readili implement .
thi wa suggest by gunter , khanna , tan , and venkatesh in <num> .
the discoveri of radioact emiss at the end of the 19th centuri and the earli part of the 20th centuri usher in a brand new era in human histori , an era fraught with possibl and danger .
there were immedi consequ .
it signal the exist of a hitherto unsuspect vast energi sourc .
an immedi consequ of that discoveri wa that it push back the ag of the earth .
now , to put thi in context , we should realiz that through the end of the 19th centuri , the best estim we had for the ag of the earth came from thermodynam .
where view the earth as an inert cool bodi , lord kelvin had made calcul which suggest that the earth should be about <num> million year old .
later calcul downgrad that further to about <num> million year .
that sound like a veri vast time period , but part of kelvin's think wa that , over a period of that magnitud , no known chemic reaction can be kept in place over period of ten or hundr of million of year .
and therefor , the proper model would be , appar , that the earth wa initi form as a molten bodi and then gradual inertli cool in time .
calcul from the heat equat then give us estim of somewher between <num> million and <num> million year .
thi kind of time period is much too short for the evolutionari process that charl darwin' , origin of the speci , demand .
with the discoveri of radioact , all of that chang .
suddenli a brand new energi sourc had been discov .
and an energi sourc which could sustain an , a reaction for million and hundr of million of year .
and with that discoveri , suddenli we now had tool to argu that the earth wa much older than had been anticip .
and current , our best estim for the ag of the earth to about <num> billion year .
and so , quit remark , the discoveri of radioact emiss gave strong reenforc to darwin's theori of natur select from a complet unexpect direct .
of cours there were go to be more troubl develop , some acut troubl and some veri promis .
but thi is go to take some time .
now , here's an experi which wa report by rutherford , geiger , and bateman in <num> .
in thi experi , thei like dope a film of polonium and watch it emit these alpha particl at interv of on eight of a minut for <num> , <num> success interv .
and thei count over thi entir period , <num> , <num> alpha particl emit .
we immedi recogn an opportun for a poisson approxim .
what is lambda here ?
well , over the entir period of observ , there ar <num> , <num> particl .
there ar <num> , <num> interv , and therefor , lambda is the ratio of the two quantiti .
it's about <num> , it's about <num> . <num> .
here ar the data report by rutherford , geiger , and bateman .
and we look at the number of interv where there were no particl emit , on particl , two particl , and so on through <num> and more particl .
and you'll observ them in thi tabl .
if we compar these with the expect poisson valu , which is , take the correspond poisson probabl of observ so mani particl .
correspond to paramet lambda , about <num> . <num> , multipli by the number of interv will give you the expect number of interv with that mani emiss .
and even a cursori glanc show remark agreement between the observ frequenc and the model frequenc .
war ar a sorri commentari on the human condit and thei've occur repeatedli through time .
in <num> , loui richardson decid to look at an ensembl of war over the second half of the millennium , over a period of about <num> year .
and he catalog the war that had happen in that time and found there were over <num> war .
a question that immedi aris is , is the follow .
how doe on categor war when thei rang from small conflict to larg contin envelop disast ?
and so , thi goe to the crux of the model itself .
on wai to do it is to take larg conflict and break them up into a secess of smaller kei conflict , and thi is the approach that richardson ha taken .
for exampl if you look at the first world war , he treat it as five differ conflict , and similarli with other larg war , the <num> year war , the second world war of cours , the napoleon war and so on .
and , with such a break point in mind , he find <num> war distribut over a period of <num> year .
by now , the methodolog is becom veri clear .
we don't anticip too mani war per year .
war ar rare occurr .
there ar mani opportun for war , but thei happen rare , on hope .
and therefor , a landa here , the frequenc of war in a given year , is <num> out of <num> , or about <num> or <num> . <num> .
roughli speak , we anticip , base on thi data , about two war in everi three year .
and if we now try to find a poisson approxim to the observ data , we can find a quit remark fit .
there is a philosoph point here that might well be worth spend a littl bit of time on .
and , it deal with thi .
what is the work of the model ?
how doe on reconcil these statist model of these sociolog phenomena with common understand of how thi phenomena were engend ?
so veri frequent for , in the case of war , for exampl .
histori tend to point at on individu or on circumst or the other as be the preceptor of such a war .
so , for exampl , the archduk ferdinand wa assassin , and therefor that caus such and such war .
the probabilist view take a much more ensembl averag view of thi .
there is no individu spark law in thi context .
the analysi , the model suggest that there's just an ensembl of chanc to and possibl , and some thing happen .
war happen .
bad thing happen to good peopl , rare .
but thei do happen .
and here's a descript of the frequenc , and what we should anticip .
all we can sai now , base upon the observ data and the model to the data , is that the fittest quit remark good .
of cours , thi kind of statist view of these chanc driven phenomena doe not take into account individu , particular happen , accid of histori .
the view here is approxim , well , i can't tell you if archduk ferdinand wa go to be assassin .
but somebodi , somewher , will be assassin at the rate of about two everi three year .
and thi mai inde be the proper wai to think about these mathemat model of these larg scale sociolog phenomena .
what we're do is get to the heart of a statist trend , a probabilist trend and elimin from the discours all the thing which add color to it , and which perhap mai give a spuriou feel of particular to a particular phenomenon .
of talk of war .
the defin war of the 20th centuri wa , of cours , the second world war , a globe span conflict of horrend loss .
citi around europ and in asia suffer enorm damag as a consequ of bomb .
and here is a collag of pictur of the devast rain in upon london dure thi war .
someth like <num> , <num> fly bomb hit were record in the greater london area at that time , no .
a new oper between the univers of portsmouth and the nation archiv ha produc an interact websit , where on can actual track individu bomb hit all over the greater london area .
thi is call bomb sight , and on the lower right you can see the cluster of bomb , someth like <num> , <num> bomb hit around the london area .
and you see a blown up segment show the river thame where you can see where individu bomb have hit .
now , thi is freeli avail on the internet .
on could just type in the bomb sight project , and on could plai with thi data .
and thi give unparallel opportun for a curiou individu to try to find mathemat model to fit all these real data .
so , here's someth on can do .
for instanc , on could simpli put in place , superimpos , a grid , block by block , across a segment of london .
look at the number of bomb that have fallen onto individu block and try to character these statist .
so here , for exampl , ar some data collect by rd clark in <num> for a region of south london where he divid the region into <num> block and record <num> fly bomb hit .
well , by now we're veri familiar with what we're do .
what is the averag number of hit per block ?
well , lambda is <num> divid by <num> or about <num> bomb per block , right .
so each block receiv about on bomb on averag .
a conjectur at that time , wa that the bomb were cluster , that certain region saw a preponder of bomb , and other did not .
in other word , there were more guid than not .
we could investig the valid of a such a guess by look at the data and ask , is there a good poisson fit to the data .
the absenc of a good poisson fit would suggest that perhap there wa some cluster .
but as you can see from the data , the fit between the observ frequenc of bomb hit in the variou block and the expect valu from the poisson model ar inde quit remark good .
i , i encourag the reader to go take a look at the websit and plai with the number for herself .
of cours , there is go to be an issu of mortal select .
what kind of region ar we go to look at ?
if a region becom too larg , clearli the poisson approxim isn't go to work .
the bomb were all cluster around london .
but if on look at small enough region in london and look at how the hit were spread out in that region , on would find a much better approxim to pure random .
in other word , bomb were target if thei fell into a gener area .
but it is veri hard to target individu element of place in that area .
echo a comment of tw kerner , we can contrast in the earli , imprecis munit of the 17th centuri and the earli 20th centuri .
and the modern highli accur munit , cruis missil , and the person deliveri mechan , veri accur , the suicid bomb .
we can target in the contrast between these , both the technolog progress and the moral progress that mankind ha made in the last <num> year .
we have seen how poisson's approxim to the binomi wa inspir in the context of rare event , where the success probabl wa small in a sequenc of coin toss .
thi give rise to an approxim , a function , a mass function of an integ paramet k , index by a paramet lambda .
now , thi , you know , more formal , elabor notat is what we call in the previou slide , p o of k lambda .
but now that we ar deal in the context pure of the poisson , and , without the paramet p to confus as a possibl success probabl , we'll dispens with a more elabor notat .
and , write simpli , go back , revert to our notat from mass function .
p of k or p of k and lambda to denot a particular mass function of the poisson kind .
now , well , origin , thi , these approxim or row as i mention in the context of rare event , as we saw in the later exampl , the , these approxim aris natur as model or phenomena where there ar arriv in time at random instanc .
distribut of random point in space .
think for a exampl of other distribut of war in time .
think for exampl of the distribut of bomb land on london .
and it becam clear over a fairli long period of time that the poisson approxim wa go to take on a life on it own .
it wa go to becom an import distribut in it own right .
and thi lead us now to consid the poisson , particularli in the context of arriv process , where you have arriv in time , a random point in time , give rise to an ensembl .
so the pictur we have in mind is someth like thi .
imagin that time is flow to the right , and that you have arriv of peopl , packet , car arriv at random point in time and fill up , let's sai , the time laps .
consid if you will a unit of time .
let's sai , on hour , or on minut , or ten minut .
fix that unit of time .
a natur question then becom , how mani arriv ar there in thi unit of time ?
and thi is precis where the poisson distribut come into plai .
so , let's start .
a poisson variabl , then think of a chanc experi which produc a valu and a nonneg integ valu which ha an implicit sampl space as an unbound collect of nonneg integ .
of cours , natur , the question is what is the probabl measur of thi space ?
and clearli , we have a discreet space and the natur measur is given by a mass function which assign to atom , in thi case , the atom of the distribut , ar the isol integ k .
and to each integ k , we want to asso , associ a probabl .
thi is precis what we call the poisson probabl p of k and lambda .
underli thi experi is a fix underli posit paramet lambda , which if you will the rate at which arriv ar happen in thi experi .
so , formal , we will sai the outcom of thi chanc experi is the poisson variabl , with paramet lambda , it's mass function , hide the lambda for the time be , is p of k , given by the poisson form e to the par minu lambda , time lambda to the par k over k factori .
now , natur , we should verifi that thi inde is a proper , a bonafid mass function .
but of cours , we've alreadi done thi .
we've seen thi in topic <num> as an exampl of a mass function .
what do we have to verifi ?
well , first posit , but thi is trite .
the exponenti function is alwai posit .
and second normal but thi , as we've seen , aris natur as a consequ of the exponenti seri .
the sum of lambda to the k over k factori is exactli e to the power lambda and therefor , the seri is properli normal to unit .
we now have a bonafid distribut on our hand .
thi is the poisson distribut with paramet lambda .
the context , the overlap of the binomi is the set where we have rare event , such as probabl ar small .
in that regim , the poisson and the binomi overlap .
but the poisson stand in it own right to captur set where you have arriv , arriv process , queue .
given such a function , it is natur for us to examin it close and discern it kei properti .
and natur , the first thing it'll want to do is visual thi function .
so , let's begin .
so , we start with the poisson probabl , here is your distribut .
and on your screen ar displai of the poisson probabl for three particular choic of the paramet lambda .
lambda be <num> , <num> , and <num> .
of cours , you understand that , by virtu of proper normal , all of these probabl for a given lambda must add to <num> .
certain featur ar broadli , immedi visibl and superfici , thei ar similar to the kind of featur we've seen for the binomi distribut .
for on , for ani choic of lambda , the distribut appear to be unimod .
it increas and then decreas .
the distribut appear to have a center , an expect , a probabilist center of mass , center at or veri close to the valu of lambda .
the distribut is spread out around the center of mass , around the expect , and the spread seem to increas as the paramet lambda , increas .
and final , there is a bell curv which look like an approxim to these probabl and of cours none of these ar accident and we will turn to examin each of these properti next .
in our abstract of the poll process we ar now come upon the follow question .
we have a sequenc of bernoulli trial , x1 through xn , which repres random sampl from an underli environ .
we form the accumul number of success s sub n .
and we anticip the fraction , s sub n over n , mai perhap , if we're good and lucki and sai our prayer at night , repres the underli unknown popul proport p .
now , to begin to make progress in analyz whether thi in fact is the case , we should start by understand the natur of the chanc variabl s sub n , the accumul number of success .
it is wise in such a set to follow the hungarian mathematician georg polya's sage advic that we should begin with the simplest version of the problem that we don't quit understand .
accordingli , let us consid the follow set .
let us begin by look at a set where we have a sampl of size three .
in other word , we look at three bernoulli trial , three coin flip whose outcom ar x1 , x2 , and x3 .
the coin ha got a bia p toward success , but p is fix .
but at the back of our mind we keep in mind that in the poll applic , p is not known a priori .
now we have a chanc experi , three flip of a coin .
what is the sampl space ?
well , by now we ar quit familiar with how to write down a sampl space in such a set .
to complet articul the sampl space , we're go to have to write down all possibl string of length three of zero and on .
there ar eight possibl string arrang from left to right in order of first through third .
what ar the probabl we want to assign to each of these atom ?
well here's where independ select come into plai .
chanc multipli under independ select .
we actual have a product space here , a space of repeat independ trial .
the success probabl is p , the failur probabl is q .
so , the chanc of updat three failur in a row , three zero , is q time q time q or q cube .
the chanc of updat two failur to begin with , follow by a success is q time q time p or q squar p .
the chanc of obtain a failur , a success , and then a failur , is q time p time q , or q squar p , and so on .
of cours we ar veri familiar now with thi kind of set .
we promptli take thi raw data and assembl it to form the accumul success in our sequenc x1 plu x2 plu x3 , what we've call s sub <num> .
and of cours s3 is now a new chanc variabl .
it inherit certain atom probabl .
what is the chanc that s3 , the accumul sum of three toss , is k ?
now , hitherto we've us p of k for the atom function , but p is overload here .
we ar us p for the success probabl of a coin .
so let's introduc some new notat .
let's call thi b , for bernoulli , of k .
so b of k repres the probabl that the accumul sum of three bernoulli trial take valu k .
we now have a new chanc experi .
we've got a new sampl space engend by these sum .
what ar the possibl valu for s3 ?
well thi is easi enough .
sinc s3's the sum of three 0s and 1s , the outcom can onli be <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> .
and therefor we can think of thi metaphor as a new chanc experi where we're throw a four side object , and the object ha got face <num> , <num> , <num> , and <num> with certain weight or atom probabl .
our job now is to figur out what these atom probabl , b0 , b1 , b2 , and b3 ar .
let's take , for exampl , the case where the sum is <num> .
how can the sum of three 0s and <num>s be <num> ?
well , it's veri clear that by an inspect of the possibl , thi can onli happen if there ar precis two failur and on success , two 0s and a <num> somewher in the sequenc .
and inspect show that thi can onli be the case if the outcom of the origin experi is <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , or <num> , <num> , <num> .
what is the probabl we want to associ then with the accumul sum be <num> ?
well , natur enough , we add the variou atom probabl .
but we notic that each of these atom probabl is exactli the same .
two failur and a success , in ani order , ha got probabl q squar p , and therefor the ensembl possibl is thrice q squar p .
right , and you now put thi all togeth .
so b1 in our set is thrice q squar p .
what about b0 ?
well that correspond to s3 be <num> .
thi can onli happen if all three of the trial result in failur , and therefor the probabl is q time q time q , or q cube .
and so on .
and we see how we can build these probabl by consider of the individu sequenc and care reassembl of sequenc which belong togeth .
well , thi idea gener veri , veri quickli .
and so , without further ado , let's consid the gener set .
so , let us begin now with a sampl of a gener size n .
x1 through xn repres bernoulli trial by toss your coin with success probabl p .
let s sub n repres the accumul success in these n trial .
our question is to figur out what the distribut or the atom mass function there is that we should associ with s sub n .
now let's consid a particular sequenc , in thi case let's sai we're look at a sequenc of <num> trial .
i've col , color code as befor , <num> by blue , <num> by orang .
and we've got a particular sequenc , <num> trial , of which exactli <num> ar <num> , <num> ar orang .
what is the probabl , the atom probabl in the space of these bernoulli trial of observ such a sequenc ?
of cours here's where independ select come in and simplifi matter , matter for us .
probabl simpli multipli .
and so , read from left to right , i'll multipli probabl q time p time p time <num> q's time p time <num> more q's then a p then a q .
or in other word , there ar exactli <num> p's in the product , and <num> minu <num> , or <num> q's in the product .
and so , the probabl of observ thi particular sequenc of <num> success in <num> trial is p to the power <num> time q to the power <num> minu <num> .
and now we come to , to the kei idea .
what is the chanc of observ some sequenc with exactli <num> success ?
now a littl introspect tell us , well the pictur is go to be a lot like the on we have on the screen .
with the proviso , the <num> orang ball could migrat and move around , but at the end of the dai we're go to have <num> ball of which precis <num> ar orang .
everi sequenc , everi atom that contribut to the event that there ar exactli <num> success will have probabl p to the power <num> , time q to the power <num> minu <num> .
and so the question now is , how mani such sequenc can we construct ?
thi now is a pure combinatori problem , and of cours , we ar veri familiar with thi .
and , if the listen think back to the preview lectur on combinator , in particular tableau <num> part <num> , we realiz oh , thi is given by a binomi coeffici .
the number of wai in which we can select <num> posit out of <num> is <num> choos <num> .
and therefor the probabl of observ exactli <num> success in <num> trial is <num> choos <num> , time p to the power of <num> , time q to the power <num> minu <num> .
and now we've understoo , understood the basic principl .
what if we want to observ k success ?
well our first line will be replac by a particular sequenc with k success .
and of cours , n minu k failur will have probabl p to the power k time q to the power n minu k .
what is the probabl of observ exactli k success in those n trial ?
well , those k success must be distribut somewher in n posit .
there ar n choos k wai of select them , and therefor the probabl at hand is n choos k time p to the power k time q to the power n minu k .
simpl .
now , a littl notat greas will make our step forward a littl bit easier .
of cours , these probabl ar exactli the probabl , the atom probabl for the accumul success .
these ar what we call b of k .
but we should keep at the back of our mind that k is the free variabl here , count the number of success .
but we ar parametr by two addit variabl which ar the backbon of the problem .
n , the number of trial , and p , the success probabl of the coin .
so these two paramet n and p parametr an underli probabl law .
as k vari between <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> up til n , the number of success in n trial can onli be an integ between <num> and n .
now let's veri quickli summar our discoveri .
we have discov the august binomi distribut .
we start with variabl correspond to independ sampl from an underli distribut , in thi case the simplest of distribut , a bernoulli trial , a coin flip .
x1 through xn ar bernoulli trial .
the underli sampl space is string of zero and on of length n .
of cours , independ select make the descript easi .
s sub n is the accumul number of success .
we will sai it ha the binomi distribut becaus of the appear of the binomi coeffici in it formul .
and thi distribut , thi atom probabl law is parametr by two paramet .
the number of trial n , and the success probabl p .
so k is your free variabl , k is go to run between <num> and n .
and for everi choic of n and everi choic of p , we've got a new binomi distribut , right ?
the word distribut here is a surrog for the atom mass function for thi particular problem .
what we've discov is a new chanc variabl , the accumul success , contriv , put togeth from these old variabl x1 through xn .
at thi stage , befor we proce , we should consid whether we've done our calcul correctli .
after all , the b of k , as k vari between <num> and n , is purportedli at atom mass function .
and of cours thi engend a probabl measur on the underli space , which now i can think of as just the number from <num> through n there .
is thi in fact a bona fide mass function ?
have we done our calcul correctli ?
of cours we could sai , look , clearli we have done our calcul properli , in which case , thi must be the right answer .
and therefor , the bk's must be bona fide , which mean that thei must be posit and thei must add to <num> .
but of cours it is alwai wise to doubl check our calcul .
let us begin by check posit .
but of cours thi is trite .
the binomi coeffici ar posit by definit , and p and q ar posit , and therefor the binomi probabl bn of k and p ar go to be posit .
so posit is trite .
what about normal ?
well , we'd requir these probabl to add to <num> .
now let's check .
the sum of these binomi probabl give you an express , a sum .
but , a littl introspect tell us that look complex but it's actual veri familiar .
the sum in the middl is exactli the binomi expans of p plu q to the power n .
but recal that q is <num> minu p , or in other word , p plu q is exactli <num> .
and therefor <num> to the power of n is manifestli <num> , and therefor inde the sum of the binomi probabl add to <num> , as it must .
the listen will recal that we've gone through thi calcul in a less intuit set .
in tableau <num> part <num> , when we were look at exampl of mass function , and we just pull thi on out of a hat , and it work out .
but now we understand where the set is .
thi aris anytim we consid sequenc of coin toss , and we consid poll applic .
now we've got a bona fide distribut at hand , a bona fide atom mass function on thi space of accumul success <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> up til n .
befor we proce further , it is alwai wise to see , examin the structur , to see whether we can glean some more inform from it .
in the wise word of the hungarian mathematician georg polya onc again , polya recommend that we draw a pictur .
and so let us draw a pictur with out further ado .
let us focu on the case where n is <num> for definit .
so we pick a suitabl larg number , which is not so small that it is trivial , and plot the binomi probabl for differ valu of p .
so in your figur you now see three case , p be <num> , p be <num> , that is a fair coin , and p be <num> .
and you can see the binomi probabl alreadi have got certain nice symmetri , certain clean characterist which ar tempt to analyz and which suggest that there ar simplic wait for us to discov .
so for exampl it seem clear that the binomi probabl ar unimod , thei increas smoothli and thei decreas smoothli .
it seem clear that the binomi probabl march to the right as p increas .
a littl introspect will convinc us that thi is in fact to be expect .
though of cours , intuit by itself would not tell us the precis natur of how quantit these probabl behav .
the pictur suggest also that there is a center phenomenon go on .
when the coin is fair , p is <num> , we find that the maximum valu center of these atom mass function and distribut , aris at the halfwai point , <num> divid by <num> .
when p is <num> , the center appear to be on third , sorri , <num> of <num> , or at about <num> .
and when p is <num> , the center appear to be at about <num> time <num> , or at <num> .
accident ?
certainli not .
but of cours , thi is go to requir some more discoveri .
someth els can be glean .
as p move awai from <num> , the curv get narrow .
in other word , there appear to be a maxim uncertainti when the coin is fair .
and as p move toward <num> on on side , or <num> on the other , the curv get narrow and narrow , which mean there is more and more certainti .
again , veri intuit , becaus when it , when a coin is veri heavili bias toward <num> , you would expect a lot of <num>s .
you'd expect a big accumul sum .
and similarli when a coin is veri bias toward <num> .
but again , the pictur tell us , there's not just a qualiti to understand , but it suggest that there's a quantit descript ly in wait to be discov .
but we ar get ahead of ourselv .
right , thi give us enough to understand the natur of the distribut of accumul sum .
we should paus now and promptli try to settl our intuit by look at simpl exampl .
so thi come up next .
befor we proce with the analysi , let's take quick stock .
rememb , we ar start with the person probabl more elabor .
k run over all the non neg integ for k time p of k .
and we murk thi to get anoth ident for k squar time p of k .
we'll put both of these to good us shortli .
now let's come back to our problem at hand , and imagin a chanc experi which produc integ valu x .
accord to poisson distribut paramet lambda what doe thi mean ?
it mean that the mass function attach to x is given by the poisson probabl p of k or more elabor p of k and lambda .
on the right of your screen you see a visual of the distribut for the case lambda is equal to <num> .
again we notic the unimod charact , and that the peak occur in the immedi vicin of lambda , in thi case at a valu k equal to <num> , just to the left of lambda equal to <num> .
we see in thi pictur , again , visibl evid that there is a center charact , and so , appeal to the kind of analysi we did for the binomi , we come up with the idea of a probabilist center of mass , or , more formal a mathemat expect for thi variabl .
thi is , of cours , what more inform we call the mean of thi variabl , or the expect valu , or , of cours , the probabilist center of mass .
but let's stick with the , with the formal terminolog , thi is the expect of a poisson variabl .
and the intuit here is that as befor the margin with weight distribut on it .
what we ar try to do is find the fulcrum , the center of mass , where thing ar in perfect balanc .
how do we defin thi ?
well , simpli enough we'll call it as befor , e of x , the expect of your poisson variabl x .
it is frequent abbrevi by the lower case greek letter mu and it's defin to be a weight sum .
the valu that the variabl take , the integ k , weight by the mass attach to k .
of cours thi is a natur extens of the idea of an arithmet averag to a set where the weight ar of differ valu .
observ that in the express i've hidden the paramet lambda , so lambda is a fix paramet , which is inform thi distribut .
of cours i expect the sum on the right to somehow depend on the lambda , and thi is what we're go to attempt to discov .
now each term on the right hand side is of the form of an integ k multipli by a probabl p of k .
our first basic poisson immedi tell us how we can resolv thi .
k time p of k must be lambda time p of k minu <num> .
and immedi simplifi , we observ that <num> time p of <num> is , of cours , <num> .
<num> time p of <num> , with k plai the role of <num> , is lambda time p of <num>e minu <num> .
two time p of two , where now k is two , becom lambda of p of two minu on , and so on down .
everi term on the right now contain the fix paramet lambda which we factor out of express veri natur , and then what remain we collect insid squar bracket , and we realiz that what is in the squar bracket is a sum of all the poisson probabl .
but of cours , poisson normal tell us , that a sum must inde be <num> , and therefor the entir express on the right devolv and give us veri simpli just the paramet lambda .
it's hard to imagin a much simpler express .
the entir here involv just break down the probabl .
churn through the poisson ident and there you go .
what wa your ?
you have a simpl express .
of cours , when you try to write these down compactli , it's simpler to compact these variou term of the sum into a summat express .
and we could all these down in a veri compact mathemat notat as follow .
the expect of x that we call mu is the sum over all k , of k time the weight b of k .
replac k time p of k by the possion addit lambda p of k minu <num> .
factor out lambda , the remain possion probabl is at <num> and we get back lambda .
what have we discov ?
if x is a chanc variabl .
distribut accord to a poisson distribut with a paramet lambda then the expect of x is exactli that poisson paramet lambda .
and therefor it is complet permiss and even encourag to sai that we have a poisson variabl with expect lambda .
in place of sai that we have poisson variabl , whose poisson distribut come equip with for the paramet lambda , know the expect tell us everyth about the paramet lambda , and therefor implicitli tell us everyth about the form of the weight function , p of k and lambda .
so , let's begin by consid first , the observ phenomena of unimod .
now , ratio of success term out to be veri us for the binomi , and , therefor , that lead us to consid whether the same strategi might be effect here .
let's try .
so let's consid the ratio of <num> , 6s of 10s , of the poisson distribut .
notic i'm keep the paramet lambda hidden now , becaus it's go to be fix for the durat of the slide .
so look at p of k divid by p of k minu <num> .
well , p of k exactli is the poisson probabl up on the right of your screen .
to get p of k minu <num> all we do is replac k by k minu <num> in that express .
and simpli write down the answer .
and now we got a ratio of two poisson probabl .
an examin of the ratio show that there ar sever term in common .
the e to power minu lambda term cancel the numer and denomin .
variou power of lambda will cancel and variou term in the factori product will also cancel .
and the dust settl all that remain is lambda in the numer and k in the denomin .
that's got to be hard to imagin a simpler form for at a ratio .
now , what can we conclud from thi express ?
rememb we ar try to show that the distribut ha a unimodel charact for ani choic of the hidden paramet lambda .
now , if that is the case , then we first expect the probabl to increas and then to decreas .
if there ar ratio success of term is to be bigger than <num> , in other word , if you're on the rise ag of the distribut .
then , that mean that lambda over k must be bigger than <num> , and therefor , we conclud immedi that pk is go to be larger than the previou term , p of k minu <num> , precis when lambda is larger than k .
or anoth wai of sai thi .
the poisson probabl , p of k , increas when k is less than lambda and then decreas there after .
in other word thei achiev maximum valu at an integ just below lambda .
excel .
now befor we go on we should take a littl bit of time to look at the express we've discov .
and see if there's ani more inform that we can milk from it .
so let's take a good look at the ratio we've discov .
a littl smidgen of algebra will do the trick .
so we've got a ratio of p of k over p of k minu on is lambda over k .
let's clear the denomin by simpli cross multipli .
multipli both side by k , multipli both side by p of k minu <num> , and then we discov the basic , the fundament poisson ident .
k time p of k is alwai equal to lambda time p of k minu <num> .
of cours the moment we've got it in ident , we realiz that thi ident is valid for all non neg integ k , and therefor if we replac k by k minu <num> , the ident will hold valid .
and if we replac k by k minu <num> throughout .
on the left hand side we'll get anoth ident of the form k minu <num> time p of k minu <num> .
and on the right we'll get lambda of p of k minu <num> .
of cours , we can gener ani number of ident by simpl manipul like thi .
now thi is the kei ident character the poisson .
let's sai if we can deriv simpl ident from thi basic understand .
now recal that we consid k squar time the binomi probabl , the case of the binomi thi turn out to be us .
let's preempt our need .
and consid an express like thi .
k squar time a poisson probabl for some fix lambda .
can we find an altern express for thi in term of other poisson probabl .
paus the lectur for a moment and see if , follow the line of discoveri that we follow for the binomi , whether you can simplifi thi and find an express in term of p of k minu <num> and p of k minu <num> .
restart the lectur when you ar readi .
we want to find an altern express for k squar time p of k .
a basic poisson ident give us an ident for k time p of k .
in red letter at the top of the screen .
therefor , if you look at k squar , and we decompos it into a product of k time k , that bring us into an express of the form for which we have an ident .
let's exploit thi without further ado .
right , split up k squar and then group <num> k with the p of k and take <num> k outsid the round bracket .
now , onc we have thi , we have immedi and fertil ground for util our poisson ident .
replac k time p of k by lambda time p of k minu <num> .
and immedi , we obtain a new express on the right .
k time lambda time p of k minu <num> .
well let's rearrang term of the product in the front , take the lambda outsid , the k insid , and focu again on thi time k time p of k minu <num> .
second poisson ident for k minu <num> time p of k minu <num> suggest that if we had , instead of k , k minu <num> in front of the p of k minu <num> , then we'd have a readi made ident we could us .
well natur enough , we start with the express for k and write it as k minu <num> plu <num> .
put thi back into our express and simpli regroup term .
okai , now the express is get cumbersom .
it's get longer and longer but there is , of cours , a method in the mad .
observ that , the first step insid the big round bracket give you k minu <num> time p of k minu <num> .
the second term is just a poisson probabl evalu at k minu <num> .
for the first term , we've got now the second of the poisson ident we could us .
replac k minu <num> time p of k minu <num> by a lambda time p of k minu <num> .
and now we're almost there .
simpli re simplifi , pull term togeth , and we've got ultim the express at hand .
lambda squar , time p of k minu <num> plu lambda time p of k minu <num> .
oh !
a casual listen , look at thi , will sai , well , look , you start with a compact express , k squar time p of k on the left , and then you've creat thi rather monstrous long express .
have we realli made progress or have we made thing messier ?
the kei here is that the multipli factor k squar ha not vanish , and all the right we simpli have constant lambda squar and lambda multipli poisson probabl .
and the kei here is simpli that normal sai that if we just sum over all possibl valu for k .
on the left , we have what appear to be an inscrut express , but on the right , the poisson probabl all will add to <num> , and thi will magic and glorious simplifi express .
let us now turn to a consider of the spread of the distribut around the center .
empir evid suggest that as lambda increas , the spread increas and , natur , we'd like to determin .
what the actual function form of the depend on thi paramet is .
so let's hold lambda as a fix , but arbitrari posit paramet and we will hide lambda , the notat , to keep our express more manag .
the natur notion of spread that we will look at is , of cours , what we've encount befor in the case of the binomi .
the idea of a varianc .
we think of the varianc as a probabilist moment of inertia .
it's go to connot the expect squar dispers of like valu of your chanc variabl from the center .
how do you defin thi formal ?
mathemat the varianc is alwai connot var of the chanc variabl , var of cours transfer varianc .
it is almost invari compact in notat by us the squar of the lower case greek letter sigma and we call the varianc .
sigma squar and is defin just as in the case of the binomi as follow .
after variabl take valu <num> , it's distanc from the expect is <num> minu lambda , the squar of the distanc is <num> minu lambda , the whole squar .
and you're weight accord to the probabl p of <num> of take the valu <num> .
if the variabl take the valu <num> , it's squar dispers from the center is <num> minu lambda the whole squar , weight accord to the probabl p of <num> of take valu <num> .
and so on , and thei accumul all the possibl .
now , an express like the on on the right is .
it make veri clear exactli what the underlin process is , but undeni , it's a littl awkward , a littl long , a littl clumsi .
and we try to summar thi in mathemat notat , by us , of cours , estim sign .
and we simpli sai , thi is the sum over all relev valu k , in thi case , k is run from <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , and so forth .
of term of the kind , k minu lambda , the whole squar time p of k .
of cours , the difficulti in further simplif is in the form of the squar term insid the summat .
so , let's take a good hard look at thi .
so , now we've got an express for the varianc of a poisson variabl .
it's a summat over k of k minu lambda , the whole squar , time p of k .
how can we fair simplifi thi ?
the listen should possibl take a moment , paus the lectur , and see if what we've learn by our manipul of similar object in the bi , the case of the binomi .
ar suggest of what we might do here .
restart the lectur out when you're readi .
now , in thi summat , we've got a whole squar , and that is of cours , veri reminisc .
of the far often , the whole squar of the kind of a minu b the whole squar .
where we identifi a with k and b with lambda .
and the kei of cours is that a whole squar , we know from our veri earli exposur to algebra , is , can be expand in the form of a squar minu 2ab plu b squar .
of cours , thi is an elementari form of the binomi theorem .
now , let go ahead and expand the squar of the other .
and if we did thi , we'd get the express on the right .
of cours , the express becom a bit bigger .
we have , in fact , expand other squar , but thi go to lead to simplif .
and the kei here is to observ that addit is an associ oper .
we can add number in ani order whatsoev and so , inevit , we take the express on the right and group similar term togeth and form sum .
so , we group the term of involv k squar togeth , form a sum .
group the term involv k togeth , form anoth sum .
we can pull <num> lambda out of the sum becaus it's a constant .
and final , take the last lambda squar time p of k .
form a sumin link for those tab .
again lambda come out of the summat becaus it is a constant .
now we've got yet longer express on the right hand side but we ar make progress .
becaus in each of the sum add .
we recogn quantiti for which we have discov ident .
let's start with the first on .
the sum over k , of k squar time p of k .
we've discov an ident for k squar time p of k .
let's promptli put it to good us .
write it down .
thi is involv express of the form lambda squar time p of k minu <num> plu lambda time p of k minu <num> and sum of all possibl .
but , the moment we do that , if you sum all possibl for k of the form p of k minu <num> , what we in effect do is sum over all poisson probabl .
p of <num> , p of <num> , p of <num> , p of <num> , and so forth and , of cours , that sum must be in fact <num> by normal .
likewis , a sum overal k of p of k minu <num> .
again , sum ar all poisson probabl and , by normal , that sum is also <num> and therefor the entir express on the right default becom veri simpl .
thei just lambda squar plu lambda .
now , let's look at the second term .
a summat of a k of k time p of k .
now , thi is veri familiar .
we've done exactli thi in the comput of the expect .
but , let's run through the calcul again .
replac k time p of k by lambda p of k minu <num> , pull out lambda from the sum , observ your sum over all the poisson probabl that must be <num> , and therefor , everyth becom just lambda .
and final , the last term is the simplest of all becaus a sum of a k of p of k just sum overal poisson probabl .
it is manifestli on bi normal and we're done .
pool our express togeth , we get the follow result for the variant .
the first summat involv k squar p of k give up the term lambda squar plu lambda .
the second summat involv k time p of k give us the term minu twice lambda time lambda .
and the third term involv a summat of p of k by itself give us examin lambda squar time <num> .
and an examin of the express righteou that lambda squar fortuit cancel .
you get lambda squar minu <num> lambda squar plu lambda squar .
and it goe awai .
and so that all that remain is a beauti , eleg express , lambda .
let's quickli summar .
if x is a poisson chanc variabl , then it's varianc is exactli the poisson paramet lambda .
at thi point , we've discov all the basic featur of the poisson distribut .
our next three segment constitut danger bend digress , danger bend topic which show how the poisson distribut aris natur in the context of traffic congest model queue .
these concentr lead natur to the poisson process .
which is a fundament in these disciplin .
these topic ar within our reach , within our grasp , at thi time .
but thei do constitut a slight digress from the main theme .
and thei ar technic more involv , henc the , the danger bend design .
sampl them as time and inclin allow .
if you wish to jump ahead then thi would be a good place to right to the conclus , to the summari befor you move on to the next tabl .
thi is a danger bend section and can be sampl at your discret .
we now turn our attent to aggreg of poisson variabl .
the concentr here is that of thing like traffic and we've all seen imag of merg traffic at high speed visual .
so you can see just traffic merg in and form a larger , collect of a highwai for exampl .
similar kind of phenomena occur on the internet when we have traffic of packet arriv at a router and then thei all rout , rout togeth and sent on their wai .
in such set , our natur question is , if on ha independ stream come in and join to form a collect , what can on sai about the distribut of the merg stream ?
thi lead natur to question of poisson aggreg , so let's start with simplest of the static .
so , recal that a poisson variabl ha got a distribut and a paramet .
the paramet is fix , let's sai it's lambda , and we have a particular distribut form who support e is on a non neg integ .
now let's start a veri basic simpl idea .
suppos we have two traffic steam merg and go the other wai .
suppos we look at the steam over a certain period of time .
let's sai a minut , an hour , what have you ?
what can we sai about the distribut of the total traffic in that time period ?
natur , in thi kind of set , we ar go to imagin that the merg stream ar independ .
let's sai we have x1 element come in , in the first stream .
x2 in the second .
these could be car , it could be peopl .
it could be packet to an internet router .
we can imagin that each of these is a poisson variabl .
we're go to think of them as arriv and then natur enough a poisson distribut come into plai .
and of cours , becaus if you have two rout come into a common center , it is not necessari that the traffic in those two rout will have to have the same characterist .
or the same expect valu .
so , let us sai that x1 is a poisson variabl with the paramet or expect lambda <num> .
and x2 , likewis , is a poisson variabl independ of the first , with a poisson paramet or expect lambda <num> .
our question now is , what can we sai about a chanc variabl , s obtain as a sum of x1 and x2 ?
thi is the merg stream .
of cours , s is a chanc variabl which take non neg integ valu , if we add to non neg integ , you're go to get a non neg integ .
so natur , the question is , what can we sai about the mass function for the chanc variabl s which is deriv from an underli coordin system of variabl , x1 and x2 ?
so natur enough , our first question then should be , what is the sampl space for thi problem ?
well , clearli the chanc element underli thi problem ar a pair of transvari , x1 and x2 .
and therefor , to complet specifi the experi , all i have to do is determin all pair of non neg integ .
in other word , the sampl space visual is on the set of grid point , or the lattic point , in the first quadrant in a two dimension space .
everi point in that grid , in that lattic , is determin by a pair of non neg integ .
sai k1 and k2 .
thi now is our sampl space .
our next question of cours is , well , what is the probabl measur ?
well , thi is simpl enough becaus the atom in the space correspond to pair of variabl , k1 and k2 .
more di , divers , what thi mean is the sampl point k1 , k2 aris is , if the first chanc variabl x1 take the valu k1 and the second chanc variabl like take the valu k2 .
but , we're given someth about thi experi , x1 and x2 constitut independ trial .
and therefor , we immedi have a rule of product .
the probabl , then , is a product of probabl , on for x1 , on for x2 .
if we further presuppos that these traffic stream ar govern by poisson distribut , thei're arriv process .
and therefor , each of these probabl is a poisson probabl .
but we have to be care here .
now the paramet ar becom relev and import .
the first chanc variabl ha a paramet lambda <num> , and therefor we're talk about the probabl of p of k<num> with a paramet lambda <num> .
the second variabl is poisson with paramet lambda <num> and so we look at a probabl p of k2 and lambda <num> where the gener form for a p of k of lambda is given on the top left of your screen .
so far so good .
we've got the sampl space under control and we've got the probabl measur under control .
what's next ?
natur , the event of interest .
so what is the event of interest ?
clearli , we want to specifi a mass function for the sum s of x1 and x2 .
the mass function , place mass on non neg integ k , k equal to <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> and so forth .
for ani given k therefor , we're interest in the event , that the sum is equal to k .
of cours in term of my sampl point , these ar all pair of non neg integ for which the sum is exactli k .
but , the equat x1 plu x2 is equal to k , connot a line at neg <num> degre on the plane .
for exampl , if k wa <num> , the line run through the follow grid point .
<num> comma <num> , <num> comma <num> , <num> comma <num> , <num> comma <num> , <num> comma <num> , <num> comma <num> , and <num> comma <num> .
of cours , we quickli extrapol for a gener valu of k .
then , the grid point for which the line , x1 plu x2 is equal to k , run through , ar exactli the valu , <num> , k , <num> , k minu <num> , <num> , k minu <num> , and so forth .
end up with k , <num> .
of cours , it'll be us for the compact as in notat and write that simpli as , if the sum is equal to k then the first variabl must take some non neg integ valu sai j .
but if the first variabl take the valu j , then the second variabl must take the valu k minu j becaus the sum of the two ha to be exactli k .
and so here's a simpl set theoret descript of the event at hand .
our next order of busi , of cours , is to comput the probabl of thi event .
and then allow k to vari freeli and now we've let now with the mass function for the sum of the two variabl .
so let's go ahead and do thi .
so here's our set .
we want to begin by look at the probabl that x1 plu x2 is equal to k .
we've discov that is correspond to all the grid point or lattic point on the line x1 plu x2 is equal to k .
and so there is exactli k plu <num> grid point .
<num> comma k , <num> comma k , minu <num> and so forth .
addit of probabl measur tell us that the probabl of thi collect is the sum of the atom probabl , and let's involv summat notat to simpli our express .
so for everi pair j and k minu j whose sum is of cours exactli k , we sum up the atom probabl .
thi of cours is mere addit of probabl measur .
but for each of these atom , each of these pair of integ , we know we've got a product probabl becaus the individu variabl , x1 and x2 , constitut independ trial .
and therefor , we've got a probabl for x1 of j , a probabl of k minu j for x2 .
but we know someth further .
each of these probabl is a poisson probabl , which ha a particular function form .
so our next step is to simpli replac each of these poisson probabl by the explicit formul in term of the poisson .
observ a paramet lambda <num> for the first probabl , a paramet lambda <num> for the second probabl .
at thi point , we've got a clear algebra set and now all we have to do is simplifi it .
our first order of busi is to make the summat as clean as possibl .
in other word , let's pull out all the term for the sum that do not depend upon j .
in thi case of cours , we have the two exponenti which don't depend upon the summat paramet j and we just pull them right out of the equat .
now , on the moment you do that , what remain is someth veri simpl .
you have an exponenti , collect the two exponenti togeth , and then a summat over j run from <num> to k , of a fraction time two power .
on involv lambda <num> , the other involv lambda <num> .
take a good hard look at the fraction .
doe that remind you of anyth ?
ha that perhap a faint atavist tug on your memori ?
hm , perhap you said , well , that look vagu like a binomi coeffici becaus you recal a binomi coeffici ha got two factori in the denomin .
thi look a lot like it , of cours , there is a miss factori in the numer .
well , let's see what happen if we fill it in .
suppos we multipli and divid our express on the right by k factori .
clearli , i've done no violenc to the express becaus k factori will cancel .
now let's take a look at the fraction insid the summat .
and we realiz , oh , thi is exactli the binomi coeffici k choos j .
let's write that down .
there you go .
and now we got a simpl express and not , even though there ar these strang paramet , lambda <num> and lambda <num> float around .
if you look at that summat holist , you might be remind of someth .
did you perchanc realiz that that summat is exactli the binomi expans of lambda <num> plu lambda <num> to the power k ?
in fact , thi is exactli the binomi theorem when you take a power k of the sum of two quantiti .
oh , thi is eleg .
thi is beauti .
now we've got a simpl compact express .
you see the summat ha vanish .
and you've got a clean express for the mass function of the sum of the two independ poisson variabl .
doe thi look familiar ?
and if you ar look at the top right of your screen , of cours it is familiar .
thi is exactli in the poisson form .
and in fact , thi is exactli a poisson probabl whose paramet is lambda <num> plu lambda <num> .
and there you go .
of cours , k is fix but arbitrari .
it rang over all the non neg integ .
and we've discov a beauti result .
we've ad two poisson variabl which ar independ .
the first on with paramet lambda <num> , the second with paramet lambda <num> .
the result is a poisson variabl .
the poisson is stabl under such addit .
whose paramet , whose expect is the sum of the individu paramet lambda <num> and lambda <num> .
but of cours we cannot promptli turn thi .
what if we add a third stream in there ?
add an x3 , and independ poisson variabl with , let's sai , paramet lambda <num> .
well the sum of the first two give you a poisson or paramet lambda <num> plu lambda <num> .
if you add that poisson to a new poisson , you're go to get yet anoth poisson whose perimet ar the sum of the three .
lambda <num> , lambda <num> , lambda <num> .
and proceed in thi fashion , we've discov a wonder stabil properti for the poisson .
formal , suppos x1 , x2 , x3 , through x sub n , ar independ poisson variabl , each with a potenti differ paramet .
then the sum of these variabl is also poisson .
and it paramet , it mean , is a sum of the individu paramet .
a polit charg ag demand a mathemat slogan to captur our ident , our stabil .
sum of independ poisson variabl ar also poisson .
thi kei stabil observ fuel the lead into time or spatial vari process .
for exampl , traffic on a highwai or data net .
the distribut of star in the firmament .
and these lead , natur , to chanc depend phenomena , which vari continu with time or space .
thi is our next danger bend option segment .
the poisson process , a danger bend , option segment .
think of the poisson in term of arriv lead to a veri natur time vari phenomenon .
so imagin that start time at time zero and progress to the right .
we see point arriv , roughli in accord with the poisson distribut .
the number of arriv then , in a certain amount of time should constitut an arriv process .
thi is what we want to try to model .
a poisson process , let's call it n , as a function of a continu time paramet t , rang over the posit half line , of a given rate , also call the intens .
let's us a greek letter alpha for thi .
alpha repres in thi kind of pictur , the number of arriv per second on averag .
so , a poisson process of rate or intens of is govern by a particular probabilist structur .
let's begin by look at how we interpret n of t .
pick ani point in time t , and look at the time period from zero to t .
then , there ar a certain number of arriv in that time period .
of cours , thi constitut a chanc variabl .
so we think of the n of t as a number of variabl up till that time , t .
now , if you tell me what the number of arriv is at all point in time , t , then in ani given interv we can determin how mani arriv were there in that interv .
let's abus notat just a littl to write down our understand of what happen insid an interv .
so , let us pick a given interv .
let's sai , from s to t .
now , the number of arriv in , in thi interv , let's call thi n of the interv s to t , is exactli , of cours , the total number of arriv up to t , for which you take awai the number of arriv up to s .
good .
natur , we will want these basic chanc variabl to have a poisson formul .
so thi come up next .
what is a kei characterist of a poisson process ?
first , we requir that in ani interv , let's sai s comma t , where s and t ar arbitrari posit real number , s be less than t .
the number of arriv is a chanc variabl n of s comma t , which is poisson distribut with a paramet alpha time the length of an interv , alpha time t minu s .
let's paus to make sure we understand what's go on here .
rememb , the expect of a poisson variabl is it paramet .
so if you tell me that in an interv of length t minu s , the poisson variabl ha got paramet alpha time t minu s .
then , on a per length basi , the number of expect number of arriv is alpha .
well , that's exactli how we had , what he had in mind when he talk about alpha as the rate of arriv , the intens of the process .
okai .
but thi is not go to be enough .
in addit , we demand that , if we look at non overlap interv , disjoint interv , then the arriv in each of them constitut independ trial .
in other word , prior arriv do not affect subsequ arriv .
so thi is the underli independ character of the poisson process .
set a time vari , chanc depend function , n of t , which ha got thi probabilist infrastructur .
in ani interv , the number of arriv is a chanc variabl .
it is poisson with a paramet which is proport to the length of the interv .
and with a properti that the arriv in disjoint , non overlap interv , ar independ .
such a process is call a poisson process .
of cours in the back of our mind we have in mind applic like the follow .
peopl arriv in a queue over a certain period of time .
the number of arriv as we track them follow a poisson process veri roughli .
packet arriv at an internet router .
traffic arriv at an intersect .
if on were to visual thi , we can plot n of t versu time , and then we get a graph in time .
what kind of graph would thi be ?
well n of t is a number , and therefor , we want to start at zero .
and everi time there's an arriv , n of t will increment by on unit .
such a process is sometim call a count process .
and so , here ar exampl of n of t gener , when the rate of , i've chosen for visual purpos to be <num> .
and here ar three kind of curv that aros by random gener of random arriv point .
now , we should paus and see if we can flesh out the statist structur , the probabilist structur a littl bit more .
of cours , thi is much more complex than anyth we've consid hitherto .
here , we have not just on or two or a finit number of chanc variabl , but chanc variabl over an entir continuum .
and then , among other thing , we should ask , ar thing defin in a consist wai ?
so let's take a look of these process again and teas out some more probabilist intuit .
so again , the kei characterist of a poisson process is that in ani interv , the number of arriv is poisson with a paramet with an expect proport to the length of the interv .
and furthermor , arriv in non overlap interv ar independ trial .
so in particular , if you give me an interv from sai s to t , the number of arriv in that interv , n of s of t , in compact notat is itself a poisson variabl with a mean , with an expect alpha time t minu s .
if we set s equal to zero , then we ar deal with interv from zero to t , and we're look at the number of arriv from zero to t .
but that , of cours , is what we call the origin process , n of t .
and therefor , n of t itself for ani given t is poisson with a paramet alpha time t .
if the mean arriv rate is alpha arriv per second , then in a window of time t , the number of arriv on averag is go to be alpha time t .
now let's take an interv from <num> to t , and see how the independ increment process is turn into a count .
so take an interv from <num> to t , and let's sai we partit it into n sub interv call zero t sub <num> .
and then think of a sequenc of valu t1 , t2 , t3 , culmin in tn , which is t .
so thi appear on your screen .
now , what you've done is taken an integr from <num> to t and partit it into n nonoverlap subinterv .
t0 to t1 , t1 to t2 , t2 to t3 , and so forth .
how mani arriv ar there from <num> to t ?
well , that is exactli n of t , right ?
well the number of variabl in , in the whole interv is precis the sum of the arriv in each of these non overlap sub interv , and therefor , we have an ident .
the number of arriv from <num> to t is the number of arriv in the first sub interv , ad to the number of arriv in the second sub interv , and so on down to the nth sub interv .
now , paus for a moment , all right .
on the left of the express , you've got a variabl which we know by the definit of the poisson process should be poisson with paramet alpha time t .
but we have an ident .
on the right we have a sum of n quantiti .
each of those quantiti repres a poisson variabl , a poisson number of arriv in a given sub interv .
what do , what do we know about them .
well , thei ar individu poisson .
each of them ha got a paramet proport to the length of the sum interv .
so , n of t0 t1 is poisson with paramet alpha time t1 minu t0 .
n of t1 t2 is poisson with paramet alpha time t2 minu t1 , and so on .
but we know more .
the independ increment properti posit that each of these is an independ trial .
these ar independ variabl .
and so , what we're do is to stitch togeth a number of arriv up to t .
we ar ad independ poisson variabl .
ah ha , but our slogan for the stabil of the poisson tell us that if we add an independ poisson variabl , the result is poisson , and it paramet is the sum of the individu paramet .
let's quickli check .
identifi lambda <num> with alpha time t1 minu t naught .
identifi lambda <num> with alpha time t2 minu t1 , and so on .
and now we've got a long express .
i look at thi , and i realiz , oh , wait a minut .
thi thing telescop beautifulli .
for exampl , you t1 from , contribut by lambda <num> .
and you have minu t1 contribut lambda <num> .
thei cancel .
t<num> contribut by lambda <num> and minu t2 contribut by lambda <num> .
thei cancel .
in fact , all subsequ term cancel , leav onli the bookend term , t0 and tn .
and therefor , thi entir sum of the poisson paramet becom simpli an alpha time tn minu t naught .
but recal , tn wa t , t naught is <num> , and therefor , thi is exactli alpha time t .
exactli as we should becaus the result of ad these independ poisson stream is exactli the number of arriv up to t .
and that should be poisson with mean alpha time t .
thi independ stabil properti of the poisson , then , is at the heart of the poisson process .
at thi stage , it look promis .
we've now got a mechan for describ congest phenomena , traffic phenomena , queue .
but the listen might well quibbl and sai , thi sound veri good , but oh , deari me , thi is realli complex .
and she might well ask , well look , what is the probabl space in a quest in ?
what is the underli sampl space ?
it's not at all clear in the wai we've describ it so far .
so our next danger bend , option segment come to the question of , given a poisson process , what is the underli probabl space , the sampl space that fuel such a process ?
and thi will lead us to the discoveri of an exponenti distribut and variou distribut connect with the theori of wait time and queue .
thi come up next .
poisson point , wait time .
a danger bend segment , proce with caution .
the poisson process is a fundament in character the theori of queue , congest , arriv process and random scatter .
at it's heart , it is character by two requir .
that , in ani interv , the number of arriv is categor by a poisson variabl , with a certain mean arriv rate , sai alpha .
and furthermor , that in disjoint region , the number of arriv constitut independ trial .
the listen mai well feel that thi is a veri complex set of requir , the consequ of which ar not entir appar .
and the listen might also recal my strident exhort in problem and chanc to alwai begin with the right understand of the underli probabl space .
so , what is the probabl space that underli a poisson process ?
it would be wise to follow the sage advic of georg paul here and begin with an elementari set , the first , simplest thing that character the process .
and if on think of the process as an arriv process , natur enough we think of time follow to the right .
and then , an object of curios becom the first arriv .
so now let's focu on thi .
the first arriv occur at some random point in time , and now natur , it is import to focu on the time of the first arriv .
let us promptli deduc a littl bit of notat .
let us introduc x1 to denot the time at which the first arriv occur .
natur x1 is a chanc variabl .
what is it distribut ?
how do we comput probabl relev to x1 ?
at thi point a kei observ make matter complet transpar and , to wit , that if you pick an arbitrari point in time , sai , t , the event that the first arriv occur after that t is equival to sai that the number of arriv up to t is exactli <num> .
let me repeat that again .
the event that the first arriv occur after t occur if and onli if the event that there ar no arriv up to t occur .
and the moment we sai someth like thi , we now have a direct path to calcul the probabl associ with the time of first arriv .
and so , directli , the probabl that x1 , the time of first arriv , exce a given valu t , is exactli the probabl that there ar no arriv up to t .
but now we have relat the distribut of the first arriv time to the distribut of a number of arriv , and we know exactli what thi is .
n of t is govern by a poisson distribut with an expect valu of alpha t .
therefor , in thi case all we have to do is look up the poisson probabl , p of k with a paramet alpha t , put in k equal to <num> , and just write down our observ , okai ?
it's p , the poisson probabl of no arriv in a durat t .
okai , now we just read out the answer , right .
if in the poisson formula we put in k equal to <num> , the fraction becom <num> over <num> , and all that remain is a simpl exponenti form , e to the power , minu alpha t .
natur enough now , the probabl decai with time , and thei decai exponenti fast , and therefor , in a fit of origin , we call thi the exponenti distribut .
now notic how easili and simpli we've comput a probabl involv what , on the surfac , appear to be quit a complic object .
x1 is clearli a chanc variabl , but it is not discret anymor .
in fact , it take a continuum of valu .
no matter .
we can relat it distribut to that of the poisson process n of t .
in such a formul we alreadi have all the inform we need to calcul ani relev probabl involv the time of first arriv .
and , as a saniti check , let's see how on could do on such calcul .
so let's begin now .
we know that the time of first arriv is govern by an exponenti distribut .
by which we mean that the probabl that the time of first arriv exce ani given posit time t is exactli e to the power minu alpha t .
now take a hand at evalu a slightli more complex prob , probabl .
suppos s and t ar posit real valu , and s is less than t .
what ar the chanc that the first arriv occur between s and t ?
paus the lectur for a moment and see if we can make headwai with thi .
if you find you're stuck , run the lectur again and you will see a hint appear .
now here is a hint .
we mai partit the interv from <num> to t into two interv , an interv from <num> to s , and a disjoint interv from s to t .
or if you want to put it in probabl term , the event that the first arriv occur at or befor t is the same as sai that on of the two event occur .
to wit , that the first arriv occur on or befor s , or the first arriv occur after s and befor t .
now paus the lectur again , and with thi suggest partit in hand , see if we can work through the probabl .
now let's begin an assault on the problem .
we know that the interv from <num> to t can be partit into two sub interv , on from <num> to s , and on from s to t .
addit of probabl measur tell us therefor , that the probabl that the first arriv is at or befor t is the sum of two probabl .
that the first arriv is at or befor s , togeth with the probabl that the first arriv is is between s and t .
let's rearrang thi to focu on the probabl of interest .
and so the probabl the first arriv li between s and t is exactli the probabl that the first arriv occur at or befor t .
from which you take awai the probabl that the first arriv is at or befor s .
again , thi is just a consequ of addit of probabl measur .
the two probabl on the right ar , deal with probabl where the first arriv is at or befor a certain point in time .
but we've alreadi seen that the probabl of the first arriv occur after ani given point in time is given in an exponenti form .
now all that remain is to invok addit onc more , to messag these probabl in the right , to get probabl of the form that the arriv is after certain point in time .
and here we go .
observ that the probabl that the first arriv is befor t , ad to the probabl the first arriv is after t must give us <num> .
the is addit .
and similarli for s .
all right , the term <num> on the right hand side cancel out .
let's rewrit the term , and we obtain that the desir probabl is given by the probabl that the first arriv is after s , from which you take awai the probabl that the first arriv is after t .
and now we simpli read out the exponenti form .
the first of the probabl on the right is of the form , e to the minu alpha s .
the second of the probabl on the right is of the form e to the power of minu alpha t .
and there we have it .
simpl and elementari .
the listen might want to plai with thi formul to see how other relev probabl involv the first arriv come out .
now that we've come to a right understand of how to categor the time of the first arriv , it is now time to turn to the arriv process as a whole .
so , we now have , except sequenc arriv , arriv at random point in time , to categor poisson's process .
our analysi of the first arriv at the time of first arriv , point the wai .
let us look at thi sequenc of inter arriv time .
where , let's sai that x1 is a time to the first arriv , as befor .
let x2 denot the time between the first and second arriv .
x3 , the durat between the second and third arriv , and so on down .
xn for an arbitrari posit integ n repres the durat between the n minu <num> nth and the nth arriv .
okai , our now job now is to categor a distribut of these inter arriv time .
let's begin with a kei observ that we alreadi have under our belt .
the first arriv is categor by an exponenti distribut .
now , the kei element here , the kei observ here , is that the poisson process ha independ increment .
and what doe that mean ?
it mean that the number of arriv in a given interv is independ of the number of arriv in ani interv disjoint from the first .
and therefor , the moment we look at the first arriv , from that point on , given that the first arriv ha occur somewher , from that point on , the time to the next arriv is independ of what transpir earlier .
thi is the independ increment properti .
and immedi , into our lap , will fall thi follow idea .
everi arriv constitut a renew of the process .
it's as if we'd begun anew .
and therefor , the time between the first and second arriv ha the same distribut as the time of the first arriv .
it's exponenti distribut with it same paramet alpha .
and the moment a second arriv come into place , the third arriv is independ of the first two , and the inter arriv time make three ha got the same distribut as x1 and x2 , and so forth .
and so , what have we discov ?
the sampl point of the poisson process ar character by thi infinit sequenc of inter arriv time .
and thi infinit sequenc of chanc driven inter arriv time repres independ trial .
each with a common underli exponenti distribut character for the first arriv .
and there you have it .
thi , now , is the underli sampl space for thi rich problem .
so thu far , we've come to a right understand of the sampl space underlin the pro , poisson process .
we've seen that the sampl space is describ by a sequenc of repeat independ trial of these inter arriv time .
but , of cours , a natur and more immedi question of interest is the actual time of arriv .
so , let's turn to these next and , as alwai , let us us uppercas s to repres a sum .
and therefor , let s1 be the time of the first arriv .
natur , s1 is x1 .
let s2 be the time of the second arriv .
natur , s2 is a sum of x1 and x2 .
s3 is the time of the third arriv .
it's x1 plu x2 plu x3 .
and likewis , sn is the time of the nth arriv .
and we can repres sn as a sum of the inter arriv time x1 , x2 , x3 through xn .
in these set , especi with time go to your right , it is natur to think of sn as the wait time til the nth arriv .
on can imagin somebodi wait for individu to show up , impati tap your leg wait until all the peopl show up .
right .
so sn repres a wait time .
so underlin a poisson process is realli a character of wait time distribut .
now , these wait time ar much more complex in term of their chanc descript .
for on , these ar continu chanc variabl , thei're not discret in natur .
how doe on go about character probabl and probabl measur involv these continu variabl ?
the listen might take a cue from how we did the analysi for the first wait time .
so you might want to paus the lectur , think about it for a bit and see where thei can write down a wai of formul an attack on sai , the wait time sn and it distribut .
restart the lectur when you're readi .
okai , let us take a leaf out of our analysi of a first arriv time .
'kai .
so here is a kei observ .
when doe the wait time for the nth arriv exce a given valu , t ?
well , if the nth arriv occur after a certain point in time t , then it is manifestli the case that the number of arriv from <num> to t ha to be either <num> or <num> , or <num> , up through n minu <num> .
we cannot have more than n minu <num> arriv between <num> and t .
if the nth arriv is occur after t .
now thi is precis the kind of observ we made for the first arriv .
and now let's veri quickli write down the relev probabl .
so fix an arbitrari posit valu t .
the probabl that the wait time for the nth arriv exce t , then is exactli the probabl that the number of arriv , n of t , up til t , is no more than n minu <num> .
of cours , thi then correspond to a collect of integ valu for the number of arriv and the collect is <num> , <num> , <num> up till n minu <num> .
the probabl of that collect by addit is that somewhat the individu atom probabl .
and therefor , by on quick appeal to addit , we sai that thi is a sum k run from <num> to n minu <num> of the poisson probabl , p of k with the paramet of our t .
of cours , we now just simpli right down the poisson formul , e to the power minu alpha t doe not depend upon k to the sum .
it can be pull out of the sum , and we've now got a simpl , close form express for the distribut of the wait time for the nth arriv .
thi is call the gamma distribut .
to be sure , it's , it is a slightli more complex form than the exponenti distribut we saw befor .
but , nonetheless , it is simpl enough in it own right .
and it is just as in the case of the exponenti variabl .
a complet character of the probabl measur associ with the nth wait time .
and therefor , we have a simpl slogan .
the arriv time , the wait time of the poisson process ar govern by gamma distribut .
we ar familiar with the rich and wondrou tar field in the night ski .
well , at least we were , in the dai befor light pollut in our major citi .
on the right of your screen , you see on of the gloriou imag of the univers taken from the hubbl space telescop .
the star form pinprick in space , scatter richli , thickli , and sometim spars .
how ar the star distribut in space ?
an approach to model is suggest by a consider of the poisson process .
now , let's now recal that we construct the poisson process with an arriv process in mind .
there wa time arrow go to the right , and arriv arriv at random point in time .
but if you will go back and look at the wai we defin the process , you will discov that , time arrow , the direct of time , wa in no wai critic to the wai we defin a probabl model , to try to captur thi kind of arriv process .
and inde , the basic definit of the poisson process could just as well have been made in space instead of time .
and so we could deal .
in space with a spatial poisson process in on dimens or two dimens or three dimens .
for definit let's talk about three dimens .
though , natur question of volum , three dimens becom area in two and becom length in on .
now , so , what we want to do is find a proper abstract of the model of a poisson process .
to captur a spatial process where point in space now connot the arriv and time , but of cours arriv is not the proper word anymor where deal with space .
we'll call these point in space poisson point .
poisson point appear at a mean intens of alpha point per unit volum .
into a dimens , it'll be alpha point on alpha point per unit less .
what should then categor the probabl distribut for the process ?
well , natur enough , we begin by consid region in space .
let's sai we consid some region denot abstractli by a .
a kei element in the definit of the poisson process is that the number of poisson poin , point in a should in no wise depend upon the particular geometr featur of a .
but should depend sole upon the volum of a .
replac volum of cours by area or length if you have to or on dimens .
so , we requir that in ani region a whose volum is sai v , the number of poisson point is tran driven in that region and that number is govern by a poisson distribut .
with a paramet , alpha time v .
anoth wai of sai thi , is , if you have a region of volum v .
the expect number of poisson point in it should be alpha time v .
of cours , thi correspond to a mean arriv rate of alpha per unit of volum .
of cours , thi is not go to be enough , right ?
thi give us a poisson structur , but onc we have such a structur , thi give us someth analog to the independ increment properti .
to wait , if on now look at disjoint , non overlap region in space , .
each of them per our basic assumpt is go to have a poisson distribut number of point .
the number of point across these disjoint region must be independ trial .
and there you have it .
we know have a spatial poisson process in on , two , or three dimens .
such process ar import in model random scatter in space .
of cours , we could imag us such a process to model the number of star in a galaxi or a certain quadrant in the night sky .
we can even search process in two dimens to model nois in imag .
for exampl , if a list ha ever seen an ultrasound imag , she will remark on how noisi and graini it appear .
it will see an imag and in the imag you'll find specular point of light there and there .
and a character of these deform , if you will , these imperfect , is provid by a two dimension poisson process .
nois process in two dimens ar usual call speckl and poisson process in two dimens provid natur avenu to categor speckl , or nois , in such imag .
the listen should alwai bear in mind when appli a mathemat model to a physic set .
as to whether the model , assumpt , actual ar in conson with the physic realiti .
so , let's go back to the distribut of star field .
and ask , how good is it , that a poisson spatial process should we us the model for such a system ?
at heart here , is the idea that we're treat poisson point as liter point in space .
but , of cours , the less object and sai well a star's a rather massiv object , is it not .
the kei here is to understand that , ye , a star is larg object , us earthli standard of distanc .
but on a stellar scale it is actual a rather small object , in the vast depth of interstellar space .
it could easili be view as be approxim as a point in space .
in other word , we issu formal the possibl's of doubl star , tripl star .
no , star ar simpl , singular , point object .
what about the independ character ?
i would again listen to my object and sai well look .
we requir that region which ar disjoint have independ star format process , but sure , if you have two region right next to each other and you have star format close to the peripheri of these region , then sure there will be gravit interact , and again , the answer here would be to consid the immens of space .
perhap the right wai to think about thi is to think of unit in space , not in term of let's sai meter or kilomet , even .
but in term of sai , teledimens as unit of dimens .
or perhap even better , galaxi wide dimens .
or perhap even parsex , on light year asid as a unit of interstellar space .
at such dimens gravit plai a veri small role becaus of the invers squar law , and therefor again on might have a reason guess that an independ assumpt might not be too draconian assumpt in such a set .
as alwai the reader should alwai check the bonaidad or the mathemat model in the particular physic circumst .
the focu of thi tableau wa on the introduct on the new kind of time variabl .
a poisson variabl with a fix posit paramet .
thi variabl take valu in the non neg integ in accord with the poisson mass the probabl .
p of k parameter by lambda , given in the poisson form .
the form of the mass function is simpl , it ha got a unimod charact so it rise and then decai .
it ha a got a probabilist center of mass or more formal an expect .
a weight sum which is precis the paramet lambda character the distribut .
and it ha got an expect squar deviat awai from the center , a probabilist moment of inertia , if you will , or more formal and correctli the varianc .
also precis lambda .
and at thi point we've got a complet categor of a new kind of chanc variabl .
the listen who ha been a littl more adventur and ha tackl the danger bend segment , will have seen that some eleg properti emerg from thi basic categor .
so if on is a stabil result , that rule ar concentr of merg of independ traffic stream .
the kei result sai that if x <num> is a poisson variabl , and x <num> is anoth poisson variabl , and the constitut independ trial .
then thi sum obtain emerg the two is a new poisson variabl and it paramet is the sum of the two individu paramet .
now thi stabil observ wa interest in it own right but wa kei in the develop of the poisson process which tri to captur a sequenc of random arriv in time or as pace .
all right , so formal the poisson process view as a time paramet t is a process , a chanc driven process , which for everi fix posit valu t .
give you a number of arriv , which is a poisson variabl with a paramet , alpha time t .
alpha here connot the mean arriv rate .
okai .
the process is character by independ increment .
what that mean is the number of poisson point , the number of arriv in disjoint interv .
in disjoint region , quantitud independ trial .
how doe on character such a process ?
what is the underli sampl space ?
we saw that on wai of do thi wa to look at the inter arriv time , and we discov that the sequenc of inter arriv time which character the process .
is a sequenc of repeat independ trial , each trial conform to an exponenti distribut .
what about the arriv time themselv ?
now , these connot the wait time of the process .
the time to the nth arriv , s n , as we've discov , is anoth continu variabl .
chanc variabl .
and it is govern by a gamma distribut .
now , at thi point , we've got a rather complet understand of the poisson process and the kind of ramif of the basic structur .
where doe it aris ?
well we've seen a plethora of applic .
the reader mai well remark , on the import of histor accid seven it is shape of discoveri .
the poisson distribut wa discov by sim on deni poisson .
origin as an approxim to a binomi distribut which aros natur in the character of verdict in juri trial .
and the poisson distribut then aros origin in poisson's deriv as a curiou littl approxim .
but thi curiou approxim went on to have a life of it own .
and over the next coupl of centuri , it becam that thi approxim of poisson .
captur not just rare event as an approxim to a binomi , but stand in it own right as a critic compon of someth which captur random arriv .
and thi then lead to thing like wait time , queue , congest control , spacial process , whimsic for exampl , the distribut of bomb hit in london , or the distribut of star in the firmament .
now thi conclud tableau ten part two .
at thi stage we'll take stock and go back to the question that we rais in part on of thi tableau when we talk about the binomi distribut and the set of pole .
the listen should go back to tableau ten , part on , revisit , and summar the kei element of the binomi distribut .
and the poll applic that engend it .
thi shall be the , the topic of our next at thi point we will turn to the fabul limit law which underli probabl theori .
to settl concept , let us look at simpl set where the binomi aris natur .
to keep thing firmli in view , we ar deal with the toss of a metaphor coin whose success probabl is p .
we're go to toss it repeatedli n time .
in other word , we have a sequenc of n bernoulli trial .
we repres these trial by x1 through xn .
we form the accumul sum .
these will repres the accumul success in these n trial .
we call that s sub n .
and we've discov that s sub n ha got atom probabl govern by the binomi distribut , b of k , with paramet n , the number of trial , and p the success probabl .
our first exampl is whimsic titl , let call thi psychic tendenc .
the problem at hand is the follow .
imagin that we have a standard <num> card deck .
the experi proce as follow .
a card is select at random from the deck .
you ar ask to guess what the card is .
the card is replac , and a random new card is drawn .
you ar ask again to guess what that card is .
thi is repeat ten time , and you now have a sequenc of ten guess .
what is the chanc that you guess two of the ten card correctli ?
what is the probabl that you got at least on guess right ?
what doe your intuit sai about the problem ?
do you think that either of these probabl is larg , small , veri small ?
now you alreadi have enough of a technic armori to be abl to set up a probabl space in thi problem and analyz it .
give it a go .
and when you're readi , restart the lectur .
well now that you're back , let's see if we can put togeth a systemat analysi of thi problem in the framework that we have develop so far .
the simplest wai of think about the accuraci of a guess is as follow .
there ar <num> possibl card .
a card is randomli select , and therefor , you have a <num> in <num> chanc of get your guess right .
sinc the card ar replac , and sampl is at replac and the new sampl ar independ drawn , everi guess form an independ event .
in other word , we have a system of repeat independ trial .
each guess be right or wrong , success or fail with probabl <num> in <num> and <num> minu <num> in <num> .
in other word , we ar deal with a success of <num> coin toss , <num> bernoulli trial whose success probabl is <num> in <num> .
success here , of cours , connot that your guess wa correct .
let's promptli put in place a mathemat structur around thi .
the guess ar bernoulli trial , x1 through x10 , correspond to the toss of a coin whose success probabl is <num> in <num> .
the number of success guess is the accumul number of success , the sum s sub <num> of x1 through x<num> .
and of cours , we know that now thi is govern by a binomi distribut , correspond to n equal to <num> trial , and whose success probabl is p equal to <num> over <num> .
and as in particular , we can write down an atom probabl , the probabl that s10 take the valu k .
in word , the probabl that you ar success with k out of your <num> guess is exactli the binomi probabl on the right of the screen .
now we ar readi to handl the individu problem that i pose on the left .
what is the probabl that you've got two guess right ?
well , thi is exactli the probabl that s10 is equal to <num> .
we simpli right down the binomi probabl , evalu it , a simpl calcul will do it for you .
or , if you're not feel particularli adventur , you can simpli type in estim binomi probabl or a binomi calcul into a search engin on a websit .
and you can just type in these valu and out come an answer .
your chanc for get at least two out of ten guess right is approxim <num> .
what about your chanc of get at least on guess right .
well , let's begin by write it down .
the event at hand , of cours , is the probabl that s<num>0 is <num> or larger .
is easiest to think of it in term of it complement .
sinc s10 ha to be some valu between <num> and <num> , the event that s<num> is at least <num> , togeth with a disjoint event that s1<num> is <num> .
in other word , we get no guess right , is the entir sampl space .
and therefor , by addit , we can relat the probabl that s10 is bigger than <num> to <num> minu the probabl that s1<num> is <num> .
now , we simpli write the binomi probabl , evalu it , and out come a clean and simpl answer .
the probabl that in ten guess of , of card , you get at least on right is approxim <num> .
now thi is surprisingli larg if you think about it .
thi sai that on in five peopl make guess will guess at least on right .
now if on realli want to test somebodi's psychic abil , on would test their perform against these binomi probabl .
and deviat from these binomi probabl , of cours , would then be taken as evid of psychic behavior or perhap , more reason , evid of a rig game where the card ar rig .
we have seen that urn mortal ar frequent us in a mortal and complex phenomena .
let's start with a plain , rather banal problem .
quit i don't have ani particular applic in mind other than of an illustr of calcul involv the binomi .
so here is an urn problem .
suppos n ball ar randomli distribut into r urn .
we think of the first ten as distinguish and we ask what ar the chanc that there ar exactli k ball in the first urn ?
what is the chanc that the first two urn between them get k ball ?
paus for a moment .
see if you can set up the problem , and write it down .
and when you're readi , resum the lectur .
now that you're back , it's clear that i have in mind a relat between thi urn problem and a coin toss problem .
and the metaphor is go to be fairli clear .
suppos s repres the number of ball in the first hand and let t repres the number of ball in the first two hand .
thei ar of cours chanc variabl and i'd like to sai someth about both s and t .
now what can i sai about it ?
let , let's think about the first urn .
there ar n ball , and each ball ha got a probabl , <num> over r , of be place in the first urn .
there ar exactli r possibl , and so the chanc is <num> over r that you go into on of them .
the ball ar place into the hand independ of each other .
if we defin success as , a ball is place into the first urn , then what we ar realli do is toss a coin whose success probabl is <num> over r .
and we toss thi n time .
on for each of the ball .
and therefor the number of ball that end up in the first urn is govern by the accumul number of success in these n toss .
in other word , it's go to be govern by a binomi distribut correspond to n trial .
on for each of the ball , whose success probabl is <num> over r , of land in the first urn .
what about the first two urn put togeth ?
well , thi is just a small variat on that theme .
if you imagin the first two urn togeth as form a block , the chanc of ani ball fall into the first , or the second urn , is <num> in r .
there ar two out of the r possibl that it could land into .
we now have a success of n bernoulli trial where the success probabl now is <num> over r .
and therefor , t , the number of ball in the first two urn , is govern by a binomi distribut , correspond to n trial .
and with a success probabl p now , is now <num> over r .
and with thi in hand , we can now simpli write down our problem .
the probabl that the first urn see exactli k ball is govern by the binomi probabl correspond to n trial where k success .
and where the success probabl is <num> over r .
let me just write it down .
the probabl that the first two urn in k ball is govern exactli by the binomi probabl , of correspond to n trial and success probabl p of <num> over r .
and exactli k success , and there we have it .
in our next exampl , we'll take a littl walk down memori lane .
thi is a famou problem which is pose by samuel pepi to isaac newton in <num> .
pepi ask newton if it is more probabl to obtain at least on ac .
an ac is a <num> .
in six throw of a die , or to obtain at least two ac in <num> throw of a die ?
newton quickli gave pepi the answer , and pepi disbeliev him .
let us make up our own mind on the score .
paus the lectur while you think about it .
see if you can set up the calcul and , if you get that far , see if you can find a numer estim and answer pepi .
start the lectur when you're readi .
now that you're back , each throw of a die , from the point of view of get an ac , correspond to the toss of a metaphor coin whose success probabl is on in six .
and therefor , as far as get ac is concern , each of a success of throw repres a bernoulli trial with success probabl on in six .
and therefor , in n trial , the number of six obtain in thi interpret is s sub n and , of cours , it's go to be govern by a binomi distribut correspond to n trial and whose success probabl is on in six .
with thi in hand , it becom transpar and easi to write down a formul .
and all that'll be left , all but the shout , is a numer evalu .
so let's start promptli .
the probabl that in six throw of a die you get at least on ac .
well , by addit , it'll be easi to write in term of the compliment that he get no ac .
is on minu the probabl that he get no ac in six throw ?
the probabl of get no ac in six throw , is our old friend , the binomi probabl , b of zero , with paramet of n equal to six , and p equal to on sixth .
we simpli write down the binomi probabl , evalu it , and we find it's about <num> , approxim .
it's quit like , it's about the chanc of get at least on <num> in six throw of a die is about two , two in three .
what about the probabl of get at least two six in <num> throw of a die ?
now n , the number of trial is <num> , and p still remain on over six .
so the probabl of get at least two success , again by addit , the complement of that event is the event that you get either no success or precis on success .
and therefor probabl of get at least two success is on minu the probabl of get no success , minu the probabl of get on success .
of cours , these ar binomi probabl , we just write them down , evalu them , and we get simpl binomi express which simplifi veri quickli .
ani veri simpl calcul will give thi for you .
and we evalu it , and we find that the odd ar about <num> .
in fact , as newton found , and proclaim to pepi , it is somewhat more like that you get at least on ac in six throw , than that you get at least two ac in twelv throw .
next applic ha a littl more heft to it , and the student will readili be abl to see applic to problem of , of weight import to the real world .
the test of new drug , sera , vaccin , is big busi , multi billion dollar busi .
and sadli , it's necessit in part becaus of the discoveri of new pathogen , which spread virul and violent .
here's a make believ toi exampl to try to get the kei idea behind the set .
imagin that on ha a virul spread anim diseas , affect fulli on quarter of the popul , <num> .
and natur , we ar worri .
and so , there's a scrambl to develop a medic , a vaccin , a serum , a remedi .
let's sai that three particular sera , creativ label a , b , and c , ar test for efficaci against thi diseas .
and , let us sai that the follow data ar report .
so , serum a wa test on , let's sai , <num> cow .
<num> were inocul and it wa discov on observ that none of those cattl fell ill .
serum b wa test on <num> cow , and after a period of observ , <num> cow fell sick .
and serum c wa test on <num> cow , <num> fell sick and di .
now , of cours these number ar much too small for applic in practic .
we can't realli get much confid with sampl of thi size .
but again , we ar try to settl our idea , settl concept .
and onc we have these concept fairli in place , we'll be abl to extend them to realist exampl .
our question is thi , is there ani evid that ani of these three sera ar efficaci ?
of cours , now , thei've given real data , and we ar in search of a statist principl .
now student might feel that thi is vagu familiar .
and of cours , you'd be right .
thi is veri much like a set we had in the discuss of the hot hand phenomenon in sport psycholog .
and a veri similar kind of test can be construct in thi set .
here is the basi of a statist test , the birth of a principl .
suppos we compar what happen to an unvaccin control group of a size similar to that test and ask , do we get statist similar outcom ?
or do we get differ outcom ?
so , to crystal matter , suppos we ar constru serum c .
the thought experi , the gedanken experi , that is be put forth is the follow .
consid <num> cow from the larg unvaccin group of cow .
observ them for a period of time .
if at the end of the observ period , two or fewer cow get sick then we have result for the unvaccin control group .
which ar similar or better than those that were advertis by serum c .
if more than two cow get sick , then the unvaccin control group ha wors outcom .
our question then is , what ar the chanc that the outcom for the unvaccin control group in thi thought experi , thi gedanken experi ?
what ar the chanc that the outcom ar as good as or better than those report ?
we now have the basi for a principl test .
let's put some nomenclatur and terminolog , some notat around thi .
so , what is the model ?
it's admittedli macabr .
the idea is that each cow in an unvaccin control group fall sick or not , fall sick with a chanc of on in , in four , a <num> chanc .
or avoid get sick with a chanc of three in four .
in other word , a cow fall sick or not in the gener popul correspond to the toss of a fiction coin whose success probabl is <num> . <num> .
of cours , thi is a rather macabr and , and cruel us of the word success , becaus success here mean the cow fall sick and di .
now , suppos we consid a control group of size n , becaus in our three sera , we have differ size of test group .
sai let's try to do thi in gener for a group of size n .
what we're deal with is a sequenc of n , bernoulli trial with success probabl <num> . <num> .
we're look at n cow and ask , how mani of those cow fall sick ?
in other word , we ar look at an accumul number of success , ill in that group of n cow .
and of cours now we know that s sub n , the accumul number of success is , is govern by a binomi distribut with paramet and the number of trial or the number of cow in the group .
and success probabl of p of <num> . <num> , macabr to be sure , connot fall sick .
okai , now we want to compar the set to what ha been report .
so , we're go to ask , what ar the chanc that in thi control group , we got result as good as or better than those advertis ?
let's introduc a littl bit of notat .
let upper case b of n and k repres the probabl that in your control group of size n , unvaccin cow , that k or fewer fell sick .
that the accumul number of success is no more than k .
of cours by addit , thi is just the sum of the binomi atom probabl .
if we add them all up , we get a b n of k .
now , how doe thi work for the three sera at hand ?
for serum a , we ar look at a control group , in our thought experi , of <num> unvaccin cow .
we want none of them to fall sick .
for serum b , we ar look at a control group , in our metaphor experi , of <num> unvaccin cow .
and we ar look for <num> or fewer to <num> sick .
and for serum c , we're look at a group of <num> cow , and we ar ask what ar the chanc that <num> or fewer fell sick .
now thi is a simpl binomi calcul , we just plug it into the equat .
and here come these answer .
numer , the chanc of get result as good as that of serum a in an unvaccin control group of size <num> is just over <num> , it's about <num> .
the chanc of get result compar to or better than that of serum b .
in an unvaccin control group of size <num> , is just about <num> , <num> . <num> .
and the chanc of get result as good as advertis for serum c is about <num> . <num> .
now the high level .
what doe student should take awai from thi is that in each of these three exampl , the chanc of replic or better what is report is about <num> , it's not veri high .
what doe thi tell us ?
now if we think back to how we set up the whole time phenomenon .
when you look at ill in a control group , we're ask , ar these , is there evid that the control group behav statist similar to my vaccin test group , or is the statist behavior differ ?
what our data tell us is that in each of the three case , there's onli a <num> chanc that the unvaccin control group of the right size give you result as good as better than that advertis .
the odd ar not veri high .
and that suggest that each of the sera actual is do someth .
the smaller the chanc of replic what would seen in a control group , the more the evid for the function of the serum .
and thi give us a slogan .
the more unlik it is for claim posit result for a serum to be replic in a unvaccin control group , the greater the evid for the belief in the efficaci of the serum .
so on thi basi , we believ that all three sera ar reason .
that thei all appear to give us evid that thei ar function .
but our slogan give us a bit more .
the smaller the chanc that we can replic what is observ in an unvaccin control group , the smaller the chanc , the more the evid in favor of the serum work .
base on thi argument , we would sai that serum c , which ha a <num> . <num> chanc of get it result replic in the gener popul , is superior to that , there's more evid in it favor .
then serum a , which ha got a <num> . <num> chanc of have it result replic in the gener popul .
of cours , these number ar so small that thei don't practic make ani differ .
but the principl is tell us someth about how to implement strategi .
a student might look at thi and sai , oh , that's all well and good , but thi , thi is realli a toi exampl .
you would not sure make decis on health care base upon test <num> or <num> or <num> car or peopl , assuredli not .
but of cours now , we're go to have to scale thi up to a suitabl where we have reliabl in the sampl .
where we have statist guarante that a sampl doe someth well .
here ar a coupl of question .
on , how big should the sampl be befor we get an adequ guarante that we don't get a statist fluke in our test ?
of cours thi is realli a million dollar question .
we realli do understand someth about the size of the sampl and how it's go to plai into the game .
a second object the student might have is that the analysi assum that on in four cow were go to get sick due to thi new diseas .
that <num> of the agent we're go to get infect .
how doe on know that ?
now in a larg popul , it's not at all clear if we have that kind of data avail to us .
in fact , in gener , we don't .
how doe on get around thi ?
well the answer to the second question is by try to infer at least implicitli what p is , by do more statist test .
and the wai thi is done , for exampl in test of a new drug , is to compar individu were given a drug with anoth group , a control group of individu who ar not given the drug but to make sure that there is no bia no subtl psycholog factor come into plai .
you give both group what look like the same pill , except that some of the pill ar the drug .
and some of the pill ar sugar pill .
thei're placebo .
and by do such a test , on can , in principl , build upon thi framework .
we will come back to thi .
so we're now come full circl .
back to our origin problem of estim .
what is the size of a sub popul in a given popul ?
what is the proport of that sub popul ?
so , to recal , thi wa a model for a poll .
we start with a popul , of which a certain fraction , a certain proport p , constitut a sub popul of type <num> and the remain proport q , <num> minu p , is the proport of a sub popul of type <num> .
how do we estim the fix paramet p ?
well , we sampl .
and we model thi by a sequenc of repeat independ trial , coin toss , bernoulli trial with success probabl p .
the accumul number of success s of n , is govern by a binomi distribut with paramet n and p , and a question is , is sn over n a good approxim to p ?
now , look all we got all the data about sn at thi point .
to let us take talk of what it is we know in thi set , and what it is that we want to figur out , at .
the heart of thi is go to be a new principl , that is articul by the statistician r . a .
fisher , in the veri earli part of the 20th centuri .
let's begin by put down what we know .
we've done a sampl of size n .
we've got these bernoulli trial , x1 through xn .
onc you do the experi , of cours , these xs ar chanc driven , but onc you do them , you know the outcom of your experi .
you know the xs , and therefor , by ad up the 0s and 1s , you know s sub n .
so thi is what we know .
the accumul sum , s sub n is chanc driven .
but onc the experi is preform it is known to you .
the experi is driven by an underli bia paramet , p .
the weight of your coin .
thi is a fix real number .
if there's , it is not at all chanc driven .
it is fix , it's determinist .
but sadli , we just don't know what it is .
so , here is our question .
i know thi chanc to an entiti onc i do the experi .
i know s .
how can i infer p ?
which is fix but unknown , from thi chanc experi .
and fisher articul a veri simpl and eleg idea .
hi maximum likelihood principl just sai , estim the bia by that valu which best explain the observ s .
now , let's paus and savor thi .
it's so elegantli simpl .
estim the bia by that valu , which best explain the observ s .
onli experi will teach a student that eleg , simpl prescript like thi ar worth much , much more than ponder condit beset set .
where what is not even clear how on could go about do someth .
the geniu of such a simpl prescript is that on , it is transpar and onc articul , it is clear that it is right .
how els would we do it ?
and two , the simplic of the pronounc allow us to put togeth a formal evalu framework rel easili and simpli .
let's go ahead and put a mathemat frame back around thi .
so , what is the basic set ?
we have conduct a sequenc of trial , with a coin , with a fix but unknown success probabl p , we accumul the success from our variabl s of n , but onc we've done the experi , we know s of n .
we're go to put thi to good us .
the idea is treat p , the fix but unknown probabl of the coin , the bia of the coin , as a variabl x to be determin .
why do i call it x ?
well of cours , habitu and tradit have intuit the think of real variabl as text .
and so we want to back tradit .
i'm go to think of all possibl valu for the bia x .
and then select that valu which best explain the observ s .
or in our set for ani possibl bia for the coin x , the chanc of ob , obtain the observ s is govern by a binomi probabl .
and now the expand notat for the binomi probabl becom us .
what is known here ?
i know what the number of trial .
i know n .
what is known here ?
i know the observ valu s .
i know how mani success we obtain in toss that metaphor coin in sampl from a popul .
i know n , and i know s .
the question is which x give me the best expli , explan for s ?
well , let us ask the follow question .
if the coin had a success probabl x , what can i sai about the probabl that it give me s success in n trial ?
again , what do we know ?
i know n .
i know s .
for each x i can evalu thi probabl .
the maximum likelihood principl sai someth veri clean and simpl .
right ?
thi probabl , the binomi probabl that i can write down , it vari as x vari .
what can we sai about it ?
well , let's massag it a littl bit .
the idea is , i'm go to select that x , which maxim it probabl .
a littl algebra massag will make matter simpl .
what matter is the fraction s over n , which is go to repres the proport of on's in my sampl .
let's multipli and divid by n to get everyth in term of the fraction s over n .
now on the right hand side you'll find x to the , to the power n time s over n , and <num> minu x to the power n time <num> minu s over n .
the two thing on the right both have a power n in them , let's group them and rais the power n outsid .
then we have an express of the follow kind .
in the squar bracket , x to the power s over n time <num> minu x to the power , <num> minu s over n , the whole product to the power n .
our goal is to find an x which maxim the quantiti on the right .
now , the binomi coeffici n choos s , is neither here nor there , it's a fix constant .
it doe not affect the valu of the right hand side , as x vari .
power function ar monoton increas function , right , so the listen know how the power function go .
right ?
the function x goe like thi .
x squar goe like a parabola .
x cube goe up even faster .
all power increas steepli .
thei're monoton increas , and therefor , if i want to maxim the right hand side by vari x , it will suffic to maxim the thing insid the squar bracket .
thi give rise to thi beauti maximum likelihood principl .
suppos i observ s success in n trial .
the fraction of success is s over n , let's give it a name , let's call it r .
what i would like to do is to find that valu x , which maxim the product of x to the power r , time <num> minu x to the power <num> minu r .
thi of cours for each given r is a function of x .
let's call it f of x .
all right , now we have thi clean and beauti mathemat problem .
i'm given r , becaus i've told s and i know n .
given r , i'm go to look at a function f of x , which is x to the power r time <num> minu x to the power minu r .
find where it maximum li .
of cours it's go to depend upon r .
right .
it's easiest here to simpli draw a bunch of graph and explor what happen to thi function as r vari between <num> and <num> .
and let's promptli do thi .
here ar variou graph of the function .
i've given you exampl when r is <num> .
r is <num> .
r is <num> .
r is <num> and <num> .
and even a cursori look at these graph show that the function where r is <num> ha a peak , a maximum valu , exactli at <num> .
the function with r is equal to <num> ha a maximum valu a littl bit further delai , but either of cours at exactli <num> .
the function when r is equal to <num> is complet symmetr on both side of on half .
and it achiev it maximum exactli at on half .
when r is <num> the function achiev it's maximum at x equal to <num> , and then r is equal to <num> the function achiev it's maximum at r equal , at x equal to <num> .
the evid is , is compel and at thi point the less dilemma i'd be will to quit believ that in fact , the function , f of x given by x to the power r time <num> minu x to the power minu r , is maxim for a given r .
precis the point x is equal to r .
rememb r repres the fraction of success in my sampl s over n .
the x valu for which the function is maxim is exactli the proport of on in my sampl , s over n .
and thi immedi give us a strong reason to believ in the nativ intuit procedur .
sampl n , and count the success in that sampl .
look at the frequenc by divid by n .
and thi is your estim of what your underli p is .
and in fact , in some sens , thi is the best estim you could come up with .
thi is the maximum likelihood estim , thi is that valu of buyer which best explain the observ data .
it's go to be hard to come up with much better motiv for sai thi intuit process of sampl and take fraction is the wai to do it .
but of cours thi leav a coupl of question .
right ?
two new question aris .
the first and we've allud to thi earlier , how big should the number of trial be ?
how big should the sampl be ?
so that we can get an adequ confid in our estim .
in other word , i would like to be abl to give statist guarante about how good your estim is go to be .
and of cours , the deriv of such estim is go to be import .
becaus if we , if we , if you can't give guarante , then in set like public health , we ar in a morass of uncertainti .
now , we would like someth more .
we'd like to know with what kind of guarante , our estim ar good .
so there's an issu of try to teas out more inform .
and if i can do that then a subsequ question would then be , how big doe the trial have to be ?
how mani trial befor i can get adequ con , confid ?
thi is go to requir us to delv a littl deeper into the structur and the natur of the binomi distribut .
and so , we should do that next .
but befor i do that , for that reader who doesn't believ in just the evid of the pictur that the function f wa maxim exactli at r , here's a pure calculu proof .
for the reader who is will to accept thi in faith , she can simpl skip over the next mini lectur , and move on to a dig into the in art of the binomi distribut .
but for the reader who's got a littl bit of calculu , not veri much is need .
all that is need is an understand of a deriv and the fact that to maxim a function , you set a deriv equal to zero .
for such a reader follow along with the next mini lectur .
so , just a littl bit of calculu .
we ar try to maxim for a given valu of r between <num> and <num> , the function , f of x , given by x to the power r time <num> minu x to the power of <num> minu r .
on the right hand side , you observ that we realli have the product of two function , a function x to the power r .
let's call that , g of x temporarili .
and a function <num> minu x to the power , <num> minu r .
let's call that , h of x .
so , f of x is a product of two function , g of x and h of x .
i want to maxim f .
elementari calculu tell us that to maxim a function , i take it deriv and find where the slope is <num> .
right ?
and that's where the cusp of the function is .
how do you take a deriv ?
well , i'm go to have to take a deriv of the function g and h .
but each of these function is the form of a power .
and i know exactli what an elementari differenti of a power is .
so , you start with the , a formula for the deriv of a power .
and appli with that , the chang rule for differenti .
the deriv of a product g time h , is g prime h plu g h prime .
and that is all that you'll need .
then , all is over by the shout becaus what's left is just simpli algebra .
so , let's start .
identifi x to the power r of the function g of x , <num> minu x to the power <num> minu r of the function h of x .
by the chang rule , the deriv of the product g time h is g prime h plu g h prime .
and those ar the two term on the right .
g prime is the deriv of a power and that we will write down .
h prime is the deriv of anoth power , and we right that down as well .
and now , we've got an express involv product of power .
you should paus , write thi down , and make sure she absorb it .
onc you've got that far , we'll just collect common term .
the power x to the power r minu <num> , and the power <num> minu x to the power <num> minu r minu <num> , as common from both side .
and that accumul the remain term , from each of the two term insid the squar bracket .
veri good .
now , just go ahead and expand what is insid the squar bracket .
that's veri simpl .
go write it out and we find that the term rx cancel insid leav someth veri nice and simpl in the squar bracket .
now , let's take stock .
in front of the squar bracket on the right , we've got a term which is strictli posit .
or at least it's nonneg .
as x vari between <num> and <num> .
so , the onli wai if x is not <num> or <num> , for the deriv of the product to be <num> , is that the thing in the squar bracket is <num> .
and so , if x is awai from <num> or <num> , you'll get <num> for the deriv , if and onli if x is equal to r .
now , what about the end case , x equal to <num> and x equal to <num> ?
now , these case ar trivial .
and becaus in thi case , you have a function , which is anchor at <num> .
all right , you saw these function go up like thi .
so , thei're anchor at zero .
thei're trivial case .
those end case , it will give you maximum .
so , the maximum is go to be at an interior point , which is exactli the point where x equal to r .
and therefor , we conclud , that the function f of x achiev it maximum when x is equal to r .
r wa s over <num> .
and thi lead to our conclus that , in fact , the maximum likelihood estim for your sampl estim the unknown probabl p is exactli s over n .
tableau <num> .
the fabul limit law .
part <num> chebyshev's endur inequ , and the magisteri law of larg number .
in tableau <num> , we had seen how by concentr of poll system , we found the binomi distribut emerg coyli from the ruin .
an analysi of the structur of the binomi distribut show us that there were good reason for optim in the conduct of poll .
but it left beg the question of how effect a poll realli is .
to come to a right understand of that kind of issu , we will requir a littl more dig into the structur of these distribut , into the probabilist foundat .
the reward ar go to be rich .
we ar not onli go to be abl to character the qualiti of poll mechan veri precis , but in the process we ar go to be abl to discov deep , underli principl which appli to the theori of chanc as a whole .
so thi then is our next subject , the subject of the fabul limit law .
let us begin by revisit poll mechan to set the stage .
so , the student will recal that we were deal with in abstract , a dichotom popul .
for exampl , two polit parti , which domin a particular landscap .
two creatur fight for supremaci in , let's sai a certain part of the world .
in a product process , the distribut of defect and non defect merchandis , widget and so on .
thei see in the set , you know , on can imagin actual a physic popul of two kind of object .
sai , call them <num> and <num> , or defect and non defect , for exampl , and thei exist in a certain proport , let's sai p is a fix but unknown proport of object of type <num> now .
and let's sai q , we go to <num> minu p is the fix but unknown proport of object of type <num> .
our object is to try to estim p and q , and , the idea , of cours , is by a random sampl methodolog .
if on select randomli from the popul at a whole , as a whole , on get member from <num> and <num> , chanc driven .
and , of cours , we realiz that thi is exactli what on get when on toss a coin .
and so , we ar deal with a set where we have , as a sampl mechan , a bernoulli variabl .
so the basic idea here is we start with an underli popul .
we gener a random sampl by repeat independ trial .
so here's a pictur you've seen befor , a tabl you've seen befor , which show you a sampl of size <num> , of which <num> of the <num> member were <num> and the remain <num> were <num> .
natur enough , thi is an abstract of an underli process , right ?
and we quickli move on to a gener sampl of size n which correspond to a repeat independ sampl , in other word , a sequenc of coin toss , where the coin of that fix but unknown bia probabl , p .
and now on obtain a random sampl , x1 through xn .
we veri quickli summar the impact of the sampl by form an accumul sum .
set s sub n repres the sum of the xs and of cours , thi tell you how mani 1s there were in the sampl .
and the moment we have thi s sub n in hand we now have a principl , a guid strategi .
we posit that the fraction of 1s in the sampl , the rel frequenc of success in the sampl , in other word , sn divid by n .
is a good surrog for the fraction of 1s expect in the gener popul .
in other word , we posit that sn over n mai be a good target estim for the fix , but unknown , p .
thi lead us into dig into the in odd of the distribut of the cumul success .
and that led us to discov the binomi distribut , and the properti of the binomi distribut give us sever reason for optim for thi procedur .
the student will recal see a figur like thi befor , which show you the mass function associ with the rel frequenc of success sn over n , plot for differ valu of n .
to begin , the maximum likelihood principl articul by ra fisher , give us ground for a belief that sn over n actual is a right choic as an estim for p .
the student will recal that the maximum likelihood principl emb , sai , what valu of bia best explain the observ data , sn ?
and a , an elementari calcul involv the binomi probabl show us that in fact the largest a posteriori probabl of obtain the observ number of success , as said .
aris when we guess that the bia is exactli the rel frequenc of success of the sampl sn over n .
so in other word , sn over n is the maximum likelihood estim of the bia p .
a second reason for optim rise from the form of the mass function .
the mass function of sn over n attain it maximum precis in the immedi neighborhood of the valu p .
and so , again , thi give us the largest probabl , if you will , of get that kind of valu .
yet anoth reason for belief in the procedur aris from the site of central captur by expect , the probabilist center of mass .
the expect valu of sn over n is also exactli p .
and final , observ the natur of the graph as n increas show us that the binomi distribut get increasingli concentr around it center .
thei can put thi in a more formal context by look at the calcul of the varianc or the expect squar deviat of sn from it expect valu .
the variant of sn increas linearli with n .
it behav like n time p time q .
or , sinc the varianc captur expect squar deviat from , from the center , if we look at the squar root of the varianc , or the standard deviat , divid by n , that should give us then , the per unit , or per sampl spread around the center .
and that , by a simpl calcul , now becom the squar root of pq divid by the squar root of n .
thi tell us that the per unit spread around p decreas like <num> over the squar root of n , as our sampl size n increas .
in other word , we brought increas concentr near p , and thi give us yet on more reason to believ that sn over n is a good estim of p .
all of these give us good , solid principl reason for optim in our suggest procedur .
but thei ar still lack and where thei lack is in give us ani quantit guarante .
how good , realli , is the approxim sn over n to p ?
what kind of error ar we like to make ?
or , a more concret question , for a given size of n , for a given sampl size , what is the like error ?
now , dig into these aspect open up a veri rich and fecund region for explor .
and so , thi is what is go to be on our target for thi tableau .
befor we dive into the analysi , it will be wise to step back , and take a look at the assumpt of the model .
come to a good understand of what we ar expect , and what the main featur ar .
let's turn to thi test befor we return to an analysi of thi procedur .
the latter half of the 20th centuri , and the earli part of the 21st centuri ha seen an explos in new drug from which have improv the qualiti of life , and extend our lifespan .
but not all drug ar efficaci , and occasion , there ar seriou and debilit side effect .
in countri at larg , there's then a polici question , as to how to put into place a regulatori process , which balanc the twin demand of need , and safeti .
thi is typic done within the provinc of a countri in someth , like a food and drug author , an fda .
in the unit state , for exampl , when a compani file a new drug applic , it goe to the research arm .
the center for drug evalu , and research .
the process is long , cumbrou , and expens .
on averag , the amount of time it take from a drug to be conceiv in a laboratori in a compani , and to wind it's wai to our pharmaci shelf , on averag , it's about <num> year , and on averag , it cost about <num> million .
thi is a big busi , 'kai ?
and mani drug , don't make it to the door .
some drug ar discard earli in the process becaus thei're found to be not efficaci .
and more serious , other drug ar discard at some stage in thi process becaus thei're found to have seriou side effect .
the process , for exampl , in the unit state goe roughli , as follow .
a drug is first conceiv in the laboratori , and sometim anim studi ar done .
just to , to give you an instanc at random .
the condit call osteoporosi , deal with bone loss , and afflict a lot of peopl worldwid .
in the unit state , the number of peopl afflict is in the order of mayb <num> million .
and the cost of treat it , run into upward of <num> billion dollar a year .
thi is expens .
now , a treatment for osteoporosi wa discov by understand the hormon mechan that the bodi us to control bone loss .
so , the human bodi secret a hormon call calcitonin , which regul bone loss .
a happi discoveri , and thi is a fishi tale , wa that , salmon secret the same hormon .
but it turn out , salmon calcitonin , when ingest by human , is <num> time , as potent as human calcitonin .
so , now we have the basi , a suggest direct for the creation of a drug .
and eventu , it wa creat synthet by essenti copi the genet signatur of a salmon calcitonin in the laboratori .
essenti , all drug follow thi kind of pathwai .
there's a discoveri process , where a drug is posit , mayb from natur , and it's creat .
thi is then , file with the food and drug associ for approv .
a new drug applic is file .
in the unit state , it promptli goe then , if approv for a clinic trial into what's call a phase i clinic trial , where someth like of the order of <num> healthi individu ar given the drug .
of cours , there is full transpar here , and thei ar told what the drug is suppos to be do , and what is known about it .
the idea of thi first phase in the clinic trial , is to establish paramet , profil for the drug , and figur out what it like side effect ar .
thi process usual take about a year .
if you emerg from thi the fda sai , continu , then you move to a phase ii trial , where now it is much larger .
someth about the order of about <num> individu to be solicit , or mayb <num> individu .
and these individu ar then test for efficaci .
doe a drug work , as advertis ?
or perhap , more accur , as hope ?
ar there ani seriou side effect , which ar immedi obviou ?
so , if you test on about <num> individu , you're go to get a slightli more confid pronounc .
thi phase typic take about two year , and if the compani sa , successfulli navig phase ii , then thei move on to phase iii .
which is now a larg clinic test , test of the order of <num> , <num> individu , and now you're serious examin whether there ar side effect , debilit , or seriou .
how doe thi drug interact with other drug ?
thi process can take three year , from start to finish , the process can take <num> year , and cost of hundr of million of dollar .
thi is veri big busi .
and in the process , a veri larg number of drug just fall by the waysid .
thei turn out to be not veri efficaci , not work as advertis .
and occasion , have seriou side effect the process tend to work well , except , of cours , when it doesn't .
and occasion , there is a spectacular appar failur of the regulatori process .
on such recent exampl wa , of the anti inflammatori drug call the viox .
it wa market by merck .
it wa approv by the fda in <num> , and wa a blockbust .
thi wa an , a , a a part of the famili of , of , pain control drug is call nonsteroid anti inflammatori drug .
it us a particular new pathwai call a cox <num> inhibitor , but the detail don't matter for our purpos .
to somewhat differ from it mechan from the wai aspirin work for exampl , or tylenol .
thi drug wa a blockbust , for exampl , the year <num> , merck reportedli made about <num> billion from the sale of thi drug , and then , in <num> , merck withdrew the drug from the market , just ahead of be forc by the fda to do thi .
becaus of a discoveri that a drug caus an enhanc , and seriou cardiovascular problem in a chunk of the patient who took the drug .
it is estim that someth like a <num> , <num> patient who took the drug in the previou year , came down with sever cardiac condit .
how , how , how could thi happen ?
i mean , after thi entir long regulatori process , how could someth like thi ha slip through ?
of cours , you know , sometim error happen becaus of will tweak of the data .
in other word , with malic , or forethought .
sometim , error can happen becaus of accid .
and sometim , error happen becaus life happen .
you sai , absolut certainti in a chanc driven world is a will of the wisp .
it flutter here and here , and no matter how hard you try , you can't grasp it .
it slip through your finger .
sometim , it's just the natur of chanc .
anoth exampl from recent year wa the diabet drug call avandia , market by glaxosmithklein .
in thi case , the drug , again , wa approv in <num> by the fda , but thei were concern about it advers potenti effect on cardiac function .
and in <num> the fda requir glaxosmithklin to restrict the sale of the drug becaus of these health concern .
by <num> the fda had revis , and overturn the origin judgement , thei return avandia to the shelv , sai , there is no evid that it caus unnecessari distress in a carda , cardiopulmonari sens .
and again , we have thi issu , where a drug wa examin over a long period of time , a lot of data were collect , and appar , absolut certainti wasn't within our grasp .
of cours , in both these case , the side effect that were posit were veri seriou .
thei were life threaten .
so , how doe drug test actual work , and doe it realli work ?
so imagin that a compani ha been work for a long time in a laboratori , perhap with anim and ha come to the conclus that a particular drug is go to be a lifesav and go to be wonder and is go to be the next best thing sinc slice bread .
but , of cours , have remark earlier .
even strong faith must be fortifi by statist test .
so what kind of test could we do ?
let's sai that , test ha been down and it is now believ that the drug isn't that efficaci and doe what it's suppos to do .
but the question now is , whether there ar seriou side effect .
in other word , let's sai that we ar look to see whether the drug is caus an increas risk of cardiac arrest .
now what doe a seriou side effect mean ?
of cours , at on hand , we're talk about someth life threaten , but we understand that , in the gener popul , just the veri natur of chanc driven life , that a certain percentag of the popul will undergo cardiopulmonari complic .
so in our instanc thing , the case is not so much that a certain percentag of peopl who take a drug mai find that thei have heart attack .
no , the question is , whether there is an increas or enhanc risk of a heart attack , if on take thi drug .
how should on go about evalu thi ?
natur enough , we do a random sampl .
so , we construct a statist test , as follow .
to begin , we construct a control test , where patient ar given the drug and other patient ar given a sugar pill or a placebo .
the listen should contrast thi with the exampl we start with in ten , part on , where we talk about test serion vaccin , where we have known , what the incid of a problem wa in the gener popul .
if on knew , what the rate of hear attack in the gener popul is , call that a fraction p of the popul , then a pool would do the job for us .
all we have to do is , test in the sampl of patient given the drug , whether the fraction who actual have complic is similar to the fraction in the gener popul .
but run into the difficulti that we don't know rate , what fraction of the gener popul ha advers problem , ha cardiovascular problem .
to get around thi , we construct , essenti , a doubl sampl .
so the idea is as follow .
first , gener a suffici larg sampl , now with chebyshev's inequ under our belt , we now understand what we mean by a suffici larg sampl .
gener a suffici larg sampl , that we can engend a high confid in our pronounc .
and then , make sure that the sampl of suitabl larg size is independ and avoid bia .
in other word we want to randomli select , from the entir patient pool .
of cours , ideal sampl as with replac , but of cours , in such a set , we reli on the fact that the patient pool is larg enough , that sampl without replac , is veri close to sampl with replac .
and onc you've got a larg pool of patient to test on , break them up into two categori .
on subgroup , on subpopul is go to be given the experiment drug .
the other subpopul , is go to be given a sugar pill .
but we need to manag bia , you see , there ar psycholog factor here , if a patient know that she is get a particular drug , that might condit her bodi's respons to it .
and so , to make sure there is a control on the bia , both on the side of the patient and on the side of the physician administ the drug , we do it in a doubl blind process .
the patient do not know which group thei belong to , whether thei ar go to get the drug or the sugar pill , and the doctor administ the test don't know which patient is get which , and again , the idea here is to control bia .
good , now at thi point we have all the condit in place for a statist test .
we report on whether complic aros in the subgroup who ar given the drug , and the subgroup who ar not given the drug .
of cours thi is a chanc driven process becaus individu respons , ar chanc driven .
now , in , individu given the drug , a certain fraction will , have complic , will have sai , cardiac issu .
the fraction of individu who ar given a drug , who en , who endur complic , then give rise to a bia in that direct .
sampl from the popul then engend an individu with complic with a certain probabl , in other word , what you ar do is gener a bernoulli trial , flip a coin toss , of cours thi is macabr .
success here mean that there's a health complic .
similarli , in the popul at larg , who ar given a sugar pill , a certain fraction will have complic for natur reason .
random sampl from that pool , then engend a differ coin toss , with a possibl differ success probabl , success again here , be a macabr idea that doesn't compel complic .
now we have two group , so we need to now make a notat a littl more compress .
let's call a sampl from the patient group , who ar given the drug y , it's a bernoulli trial , with a particular success probabl .
and let's call zed , the result of a bernoulli trial , a select of a from a group given a placebo .
and now we have a doubl sampl .
for the drug , we have n individu , and we monitor their respons to the drug .
we tabul which individu had a health complic , let's sai a cardiac arrest , and which individu did not , we have a sequenc of bernoulli trial .
similarli for the placebo , we have anoth sequenc of bernoulli trial , thi time let's sai zed <num> through zed n , which tag those individu in that control group , who report health problem .
all right ?
bear in mind , that these ar bernoulli trial with a priori , unknown success probabl , okai ?
of cours , success here is in thi peculiar , macabr view of life , where a success mean a health problem , a cardiac arrest .
okai , where do we go from here ?
well the idea is to compar the , the complic frequenc in the group given the drug , with a complic frequenc in the group who got a sugar pill .
the fraction of individu , who were given the drug who report complic , is the sum of y1 to yn divid by n , thi give you exactli the number of individu who had complic in that sub group and divid by give you the fraction , the rel frequenc of complic in that group .
likewis , the rel frequenc of complic in the second group , zed <num> through zed n and you add them up , it tell you how mani complic that you had in the individu who ar given the placebo , divid by n , you've got a rel frequenc .
the absolut differ , between these two term is the discrep in the rel frequenc , it is the observ differ , visual , between these two sampl .
let call thi by the uppercas greek letter delta , the d in greek .
so , delta is what we observ , rememb ?
so what ar the condit of the experi ?
we don't know a priori .
which sub group here or what is the proport of individu given a drug who ar go to report problem , and we don't know a priori , what proport of healthi individu or what proport we do us with health and drug , what ar problem .
we select a name suitabl larg , and then we creat a doubl sampl , properli avoid bia , by do a blind doubl sampl .
and then we count the rel frequenc of complic in on group and the other and compar .
the differ is the discrep .
so here's what we know .
now , thi number delta is avail to us , you see thi what we're empir observ .
so now we have thi number delta , know thi delta , what can we sai about the drug , and let's come right down to the number , and if you'll forgiv the pun , here is the heart of the matter , okai .
how like is it that the observ discrep , between the two sampl , the observ discrep in outcom , between patient given the drug and the placebo is due not becaus the drug doe someth nefari or bad , but is due just to chanc fluctuat .
we now have at hand the critic basi for a princip statist test .
so now we know how drug test in princip is conduct .
and of cours , it work .
els , we would hardli do it .
right ?
so let's probe into why it actual work and what kind of guaranti we get .
so , the set is as follow .
rememb that we have a doubl blind sampl .
on group of patient is given the drug , on group is given a sugar pill or a placebo .
we track the incid of problem report by each group , we get the bernoulli trial .
out of thi , we construct a discrep in the rel frequenc of problem in on group vi a vi the rel frequenc of problem in the other group , we have a discrep delta .
bear in mind that onc we've collect the data , we know thi number delta .
it's chanc driven .
each time we do the experi , we're go to get a differ number .
but for our experi , we know delta .
our question is the follow .
is thi observ discrep larger than we would expect from just natur random variat if the drug were actual realli safe ?
and now we have a principl basi for a statist test .
we've seen someth like thi when we discuss the hot hand in basketbal .
so , without further ado , what is the idea ?
we assess the likelihood of the observ the discrep delta , the known delta , assum the drug were truli harmless .
if the drug were truli harmless , would we get such a delta by just chanc fluctuat ?
and we do thi by comparison with a port experi .
or in the german , a gedanken experi , where we consid what would happen if we had a doubl blind , doubl sampl of patient , both of whom ar given a placebo .
in other word , if the drug were harmless , then as far as health complic ar concern , it behav just like a sugar pill .
it's as if we gave both group of patient sugar pill .
why don't we assess what would happen in thi thought experi if we gave two group of patient sugar pill and ask what ar the chanc that the discrep there is larger than the observ discrep delta ?
all right .
and thi will then lead us to a principl idea of how it's go to work .
so , let's start .
the gedkanken experi , the thought experi , consist of gener , in principl , a doubl sampl of patient split doubl blind into two group , and each group is given placebo .
the first group report health complic , accord to a sequenc of bernoulli trial .
let's call them x1 through xn .
the second group , in principl , report health problem accord to bernoulli trial , x1 prime through xn prime .
sinc both group ar given , be given these sugar pill , thei're both govern by the same bernoulli paramet , p , which we do not know , right ?
thi is the probabl of occurr , of health complic , in the patient pool if you ar given anyth , if thei're given a sugar pill .
from here , we directli figur out how mani patient were affect in the first group .
call it s sub n , the number of complic in that group , and the number of complic in the second group , we call it s sub n prime .
and we , of cours , know that by ad bernoulli trial , we're go to get binomi distribu , distribut variabl .
so , both sn and sn prime ar binomi distribut with paramet n , the number of trial .
and p , the success probabl .
bear in mind that we do not know p .
but we do know n .
n is a number in the sampl .
but p is the unknown rate at which complic occur in the gener popul if thei ar not given treatment .
okai ?
what is the kei idea ?
ask , how like is it that the differ in the rel frequenc in the first group given a placebo , and the second group given a placebo , ar in excess of the observ discrep of the test done in practic ?
so let's put some mathemat window dress around , let's dress it up , so that we can focu clearli on what it is that we want to calcul .
we want to evalu the probabl that the differ on the rel frequenc of incid in the two placebo group in absolut valu exce the observ discrep delta in the experi that wa actual done in our clinic trial .
so thi is what we want to evalu .
we should immedi paus , take stock , and get our mind around what the chanc experi realli is .
what is a sampl space ?
well , natur enough , the sampl space is a two n tupl of on and zero .
two n bernoulli trial .
okai ?
what is the probabl measur ?
oh , it's go to be engend by just multipli ps and qs , becaus of independ trial .
and what is the event at hand ?
well it is inform by sn and sn prime , and let's focu on exactli what that mean by simplifi our fraction .
clear the denomin by multipli all the term by n .
and we find that thi is equival to the statement that we want to evalu the probabl .
that the number of occurr in the first placebo group , differ from the number of occurr in the second placebo group in absolut valu , by n time delta , the observ discrep or more .
okai .
now we've got thi concret object to wrap our head around .
let's put thi down , examin it and sai , well okai , here's what we've got , how do we go about comput it ?
the event at hand is determin by the differ between the accumu , accumul sum sn and sn prime .
so let's focu on thi .
now both sn and sn prime ar chanc driven , but we know that thei ar binomi distribut variabl .
of cours , we know the n , and we know there's an hidden but fix p underli all of thi .
so thei're binomi distribut with paramet n and p , and of cours we know that the expect valu of these binomi distribut is exactli n time p .
and so , a happi thought strike us .
sn and sn prime ar chanc driven , but we know that we expect each of them to concentr around the center , around n time p .
why don't we simpli compar each of them to n time p ?
well , sai , look at sn minu sn prime .
and by the simpl expedi of ad and subtract n time p .
and group term , we now have two term .
on the right , each term in the round bracket is a comparison of a binomi with it expect valu .
and we know a great deal about these , don't we ?
'kai .
let's simplifi thing just a littl bit further .
on the right , we have two term .
in round bracket , a term , let's call it a for simplic .
and in round bracket a term , let's call it b .
and so we have the absolut valu of a minu b .
but elementari algebra tell us that the absolut valu of a minu b is no larger than the absolut valu of a plu the absolut valu of b .
thi is what we call the triangl inequ .
if we want to appeal to geometri , thi is just a statement that two side of a triangl ar larger than the third .
okai , with thi identif of a and b , we can see immedi that the desir observ valu for differ is bound about by a sum of two differ , sn minu np , and sn prime minu np .
of cours now we want the probabl the object on the left exce epsilon .
but thi engin , there's a new principl , right ?
on the left , we want sn minu sn prime in absolut valu to exce a certain quantiti .
thi is the event at hand .
let's us a's and b's to simplifi notat for the time be .
we want the absolut valu of a minu b to be larger than the absolut valu of c for some posit c .
good .
but if a minu b in absolut valu should exce the absolut valu of c , then it prefer forc at least on of two inequ to be true , that either a in absolut valu ha to be bigger than c in absolut valu over two .
or , b in absolut valu ha to exce c in absolut valu over <num> , or perhap both .
why ?
if both the condit on the right were violat , if a wa smaller than c over <num> and b wa smaller than c over <num> , then the differ of a and b in absolut valu , could not possibl exce c .
and so , the condit on the left impli the occurr of at least on of the two condit on the right .
right ?
let's write it out now in word , identifi our a and our b , and our c .
if the event that sn minu sn prime in absolut valu exce n delta is to occur , then at least on of the two event , sn minu np in absolut valu exce n delta over <num> , or sn prime minu np in absolut valu exce n delta over <num> .
at least on of those two event ha to occur .
the occurr of the event on the left impli the occurr of at least on of the two event on the right .
or , yet again , if you want to describ it mathemat , the event on the left is a set , and that set is contain in the union of the two event on the right .
now we've come to a right understand of the event at hand .
all's , almost , howev , bother shout .
let's assembl everyth togeth .
the event at hand on the left on the top of the screen is , impli at least on of the two event on the right .
so we want to comput a probabl .
monoton of probabl measur tell you that if you have a bigger event , you get a bigger probabl .
so the probabl of the event on the left is certainli no larger than the probabl of the event on the right .
but on the right , i got a union of two event , call them temporarili a and b .
the probabl of the a union b , on the other hand , by what we call bool's inequ .
and thi will take you right back to the basic properti of probabl measur in tableau five .
by bool's inequ , the probabl that on or the other or both event occur is bound a bow by the sum of the event probabl .
identifi a with the first event on the right , b with a second event on the right , and we immedi get an inequ .
oh , thi is love , okai ?
and it look like we have complic matter , but we've realli , realli simplifi it .
and on more step will make it complet transpar .
we've got two probabl on the right .
how do you deal with thi ?
well , we realiz that both sn and sn prime ar statist the same .
what i mean by that is , thei're both govern by the self same binomi distribut .
and if that is the case , the probabl law govern each of them , sn and sn prime , is exactli the same , which mean the probabl be queri must be ident equal .
and therefor , we simpli get twice the probabl , or let's sai on of them , sai the first on .
thi is get simpler and simpler .
the express on the right , the probabl , look veri familiar and for a reason .
we've seen thi befor .
it ask , what is the probabl that the accumul sum of bernoulli trial , the accumul success differ from it expect valu by some amount .
but thi is exactli the probabl in the tail of the binomi distribut .
we know the distribut is go to get concentr around the center , so thi probabl should be small .
and inde , chebyshev's inequ give us an explicit character of how small .
so we just run chebyshev's inequ through here .
and here observ that the number delta , the discrep that we know from our experi , divid by <num> , plai the role of the error paramet epsilon that we had in chebyshev's inequ .
plug it in , and we've got now an eleg and simpl answer .
the desir probabl that in my gedanken experi , the rel frequenc of success in the two group exce the state discrep is no larger than twice a term given by chebyshev's inequ .
let's simplifi , right .
when you expand our delta to the whole squar , you get delta squar over <num> , <num> cancel out .
and now we've got a realli eleg and simpl estim .
the desir probabl is no larger than <num> divid by n time delta squar .
we'll have to be a veri demand custom if we want someth even simpler than thi .
thi is beauti , eleg , and simpl , and immedi it give rise to a pronounc in term of what our test is suppos to tell .
here's what we've got .
a probabl of a deviat is no larger than <num> over n delta squar .
rememb , delta is a known discrep between the patient get the drug and the patient get the placebo .
if you want to , to evok some of the notat we've us earlier , then n time delta plai the role of our error , n delta is the error .
and the express on the right should then plai the role of a confid paramet , a delta where <num> minu delta ha the confid .
without further ado , let's just call it a lower case delta .
thi is the confid paramet .
now , here is the basic set .
the estim on the right tell us the chanc that random fluctuat give you a discrep as bad or wors than what is actual observ .
what can we conclud from thi ?
we can conclud in two direct .
on , what if thi fraction is small , what if littl delta is a small number ?
a small valu for littl delta impli , for exampl , let's sai littl delta is <num> .
it sai it's rather unlik that chanc fluctuat will give rise to a discrep as big as we have seen .
thi then suggest that the drug is actual caus complic .
it is enhanc the risk .
the chanc of get such a larg discrep by accid is small .
so small bound suggest that there is a seriou chanc that the drug is caus complic .
on the other hand , if the valu for the bound , the confid paramet , is rel larg , sai , <num> , <num> , someth like that .
then , such a larg discrep is what we observ in our patient pool , is easili explic by just random chanc fluctuat , life happen noth is certain .
of cours we do have to be a bit cautiou with second part of thi pronounc , you see , becaus i don't , have not given you an exact estim , an accur estim of the probabl .
i've given you a bound .
it is conceiv that the bound is to loos , it's a poor bound .
so a larg number might not realli sai that the probabl is larg .
so , if you want to treat that argument a littl further , get a more accur and definit pronounc , then we'll want to get a more accur estim .
i will defer that , right ?
but at least , we have now a suggest direct for interv .
we comput thi likelihood , and it's encapsul in a fraction .
if a fraction is small , we have reason to believ that the drug caus health complic .
if the fraction is larg , we have some reason to believ that the drug is incident doe not do ani damag .
and so here we have a slogan .
the smaller the fraction , <num> time a reciproc of n time the observ discrep squar .
the smaller thi fraction is , the more like that the drug in question exhibit signific enhanc side effect , for exampl , cardiac arrest , of the type be test .
again , it is hard to imagin a simpler and easier pronounc .
befor we proce , you know , we're probabl well to do a littl saniti check and a test of your understand .
so let's try thi .
consid two set .
on where you have a sampl size of size <num> , so you have a doubl sampl of <num> and <num> .
<num> given a drug , <num> given a placebo .
and you observ a discrep .
so what discrep level can you conclud that there's a <num> confid that there ar , in fact , side effect from the drug .
at what discrep level can you conclud that there is a <num> confid that the drug caus side effect ?
do it again if the sampl size is bump up from <num> to <num> , <num> .
paus the lectur .
scribbl with it .
try to get your head around these concept , and see if you can come up with number .
restart the lectur when you're readi .
all that is requisit is to plug into your favorit calcul , and the valu for littl delta be <num> minu the , the confid paramet , right , and the valu for n .
so let's do thi without further ado .
suppos n is <num> , and the confid paramet is <num> .
in other word , we want a confid of <num> , and so delta is now <num> .
we find that the discrep , big delta , is now <num> .
what if we increas the confid demand to <num> ?
in thi case , <num> minu delta is <num> , or <num> .
so littl delta is now <num> .
plug it into the express , and we find that the discrep now becom <num> . <num> .
in other word , if our confer demand ar quit small , then a rel small discrep will trigger it .
if our confid demand ar high , then our discrep creep outward .
what happen if we increas the sampl size ?
we go from a <num> to <num> , <num> .
now , befor you take a look at the number , you know , we should understand what increas the sampl size doe .
when you increas n , the binomi get increasingli concentr right around it expect valu .
in other word , it get highli like that sn and sn prime both behav veri similar to each other , both close to n time p .
so the differ is go to be veri close to <num> , which then make even small discrep harder to explain by random fluctuat .
so , a discrep of <num> . <num> is alreadi rare when the sampl size is <num> , <num> if you want a confid of <num> .
but if you want a confid of <num> , it creep up from <num> . <num> to <num> . <num> .
let's step back .
so what have we realli done , what have we achiev here ?
we've articul a systemat process for check the bona fide of a new put wonder drug .
we're ask , doe thi drug caus side effect of a particular type , and the test involv simpli run a patient pool , on given a drug , on given a placebo under suitabl safeguard to govern bia .
the test itself is simplic itself .
all it requir is an understand of how much the discrep is , and that's an easi calcul and ask how much confid do i need to enact polici .
and out of all of that , come an immedi conclus .
at thi point , you know , we should ask , where do we go now , you know , quo vadi .
i mean , thi is interest , it's beauti , a rel elementari argument .
ye , we did work hard to get here .
but if the student will go back and take a look at it , she will realiz that the mathemat wasn't that hard , and step by step it wa just essenti a few simpl algebra step .
the result of the analysi give rise to veri eleg and easili implement polici proscript .
we can do poll , and we can even test drug efficaci .
now , at thi point , the sampl size requisit ar modest .
if you rememb , when we're do a poll to get accur estim , sai for about <num> error with a <num> confid , we need by our estim us chebyshev's inequ , someth like <num> , <num> sampl size .
<num> , <num> individu give us good estim .
when you move to drug test , we were labor under the problem that not onli did we not know the underli success probabl , but we were compar a doubl sampl .
you see , we were compar a probabl for the drug with a probabl for the placebo , both of which were unknown .
and so , we end up effect estim the probabl for the placebo while we ar do our experi .
we're go to have to pai a price for thi doubl estim , and thi price is manifest in the factor two in the numer of amount .
so roughli speak , our sampl size will doubl to get the same kind of confid we had when we're do just a poll .
which mean , that if we need <num> , <num> individu to get a reason ac , reason accur estim for a poll , we're now go to need <num> , <num> individu .
now , at on level that's encourag new , right ?
it's a fix number .
at anoth level , thi is veri disquiet .
i've told you how expens thi process is .
<num> , <num> individu will cost an enorm amount of monei to monitor , to check , to , to recruit .
and so , there is an incent here to see if we can improv the bound , reduc the sampl complex demand on a process .
<num> , <num> is a lot .
can we bring it down to someth more manag ?
so thi is on profit direct for inquiri , and thi is go to lead us to the fabul bell curv .
that is the subject of our next tableau .
a second direct for inquiri is chebyshev's inequ work beautifulli for the binomi .
i wonder if it per chanc could work in other set .
thi turn out to be a veri rich and profit direct for inquiri .
and thi lead , among other thing , to new procedur and algorithm for comput veri complex , veri larg problem .
thi will be the subject of our next mini lectur .
summari of tableau <num> .
the fabul limit law .
part on .
chebyshev's endur inequ and the magisteri law of larg number .
we begin with a random sampl and at the heart of a random sampl ar two kei featur .
first , the idea of independ , a rule of product .
sampl element must be independ , on from the other .
and second , the pernici persist of subtl bia in real sampl .
where a call bia can erupt via geograph or sampl bia .
via refus bia , the fish refus to bite , we don't want to answer a telephon poll and word bia .
implicit and a probabilist analysi of a problem is the , a priori assumpt that a sampl's bona fide have been establish .
in other word , the sampl is independ and bia free .
arm with thi understand of a random sampl , we begin with a model for a poll .
we have an underli popul for a chanc experi in which a subpopul of proport size p exist and we would like to estim the size of thi proport p .
natur enough , our random sampl constitut a sequenc of bernoulli trial whose success probabl is p .
and atart with the sampl , we form the accumul number of success , s sub n as the number of element in the sampl of type on .
natur enough , we understand that sn ha a binomi distribut with paramet n and p and there ar good reason to believ that sn ha at it heart , a reason estim for the underli p .
we recal that the expect of sn is n time p .
and therefor , that lead to a principl estim , sn over n for the underli unknown paramet of p .
we have all kind of good reason to believ that thi would be a reason estim .
the maximum likelihood principl of r . a .
fisher , the expect valu , the concentr of the variabl .
okai .
but to go from a qualit to a quantit understand , we need to put down a mathemat structur for the problem .
ani estim when , will incur an error and becaus the estim is transbas , there'll be a certain with which you can make renounc .
ty these two togeth is the sampl size , the amount of data avail for the problem .
what is it that we want ?
given an error toler of up to epsilon and a desir confid of , let us sai , <num> minu delta , we would like the probabl that our estim sn over n differ from the true , but unknown p by more than epsilon to be no more than delta .
so thi is what we would like .
the analyt two , which allow us to make such guarante is chebyshev's subtl and beauti inequ , lead to the law of larg number .
and what doe it sai ?
it sai that the probabl that a rel frequenc of success in the sampl .
sn divid by n , differ from p in absolut valu by more than epsilon is bound about by the reciproc of <num> time n time epsilon squar .
and for ani epsilon , howev small as n becom larg , thi ratio goe to zero .
thi is the content of the law of larg number and thi is respons for much of the intuit content of the theori .
but directli , for our applic in mind , thi estim give us a guarante that we seek .
for ani desir confid paramet <num> minu delta .
we know that the right hand side <num> over 4n in epsilon squar will dip below delta if n is big enough and that give us a link between sampl size , error and confid .
immedi , we can conclud that if n is larger than the reciproc of <num> time epsilon squar time delta , then our estim provid an error , which is , doe not exce epsilon and the confid of thi pronounc is at least <num> minu delta .
if you promptli put in number , we find , for exampl , that we can guarante an error of no more than <num> in the unknown p with a confid of at least <num> , provid n is no more than about <num> , <num> .
and immedi , that give us the kind of guarante in applic that we're look for .
why do poll work ?
poll work , becaus we're go to estim an unknown p by sn over n and thi estim give us an error of no more than <num> with a confid of at least <num> if n is just a littl over <num> , <num> .
now thi is a remark statement .
consequ , the underli popul could be enorm .
could have hundr of million of peopl , billion of peopl .
nonetheless , a fix , rel modest sampl give us control of estim over these larg popul .
a smaller variat of thi theme tell us why drug test work .
here we work not with on sampl , you see , becaus the underli efficaci of the drug , the underli propens of a drug for creat side effect , which ar deleteri is not a priori known .
how do we compar what the drug doe with what happen in the popul at larg ?
to do thi , we start with a random doubl sampl , on for a drug , on for a placebo .
and we compar the discrep in the rel frequenc in the two case .
now we should understand that here , on more level of uncertainti ha been introduc .
now we ar compar two random sequenc , on vi a vie the other .
we natur anticip that the sampl size need to give guarante of similar area and confid have to doubl and inde , thei do .
so roughli speak , if a sampl of sign abov <num> , <num> work for a poll , we would need to doubl it , get a sampl of about size <num> , <num> to get similar estim in a drug test scenario .
but again , the sampl size is fix .
and with a rel modest sampl size , we've got veri good estim .
at the heart , thi is why poll work .
thi is why drug test work .
thi is the good new .
thi is encourag .
from a pragmat point of view howev , we might quibbl .
test <num> , <num> peopl is not at all trivial .
if you ask <num> peopl for answer , ye , we get accur estim .
but gener a random sampl of size <num> , <num> is veri expens .
and of cours , gener for a drug test trial .
a random sampl of size <num> , <num> , on for each of the drug and the placebo is now quadrupl the stake .
thi becom enorm expens even at these appar modest number .
and so from a pure pragmat point of view , our next question might be is it possibl to reduc the sampl size number further and still get the same guarante .
inde , it is go to be .
okai .
but befor we turn to see how to reduc these number further , we'll take a small digress .
okai .
the law of larg number is the oldest , the most vener and perhap the most intuit of the fabul limit law in the theori of chanc .
we've seen it oper almost serendipit through chebyshev's marvel inequ in the context of poll .
we will take a small detour now to pick up why thi law is so ubiquit in a rather gener set .
thi two done two is anxiou to get to the rest just stai might wish to skip .
the next top low <num> part two , where you flesh these extens of the law of larg number .
for the student , who wish to actual see how thi law gener and work in a veri broad context , proce , but be warn that thi is now a danger bend section to be sampl with discret if time and inclin allow .
and befor plung in , it would be advis to first sampl the danger been section tableau six part part two .
becaus i'm go to setup a law of larg number in the continuum to give a flavor of how a gener law can be construct .
tableau <num> .
the fabul limit law .
part two , the law of larg number in continu space , comput la mont carlo .
the law of larg number , in the centuri and a half that follow it public , wa extend wide .
at it heart it captur much of the intuit content of the theori .
to wit , that rel frequenc captur the essenc of probabl in long run .
to get an understand of how thi statement can be put in a veri gentl context , i turn to the set of continu variabl .
thi segment is intend for the student who wish to sai how a fundament theoret result can be extend wide and sit at the base of much of the theori of chanc , preparatori , perhap , to take more cours in the subject .
thi is , accordingli , a danger bend of lectur , to be sampl as time and inclin allow at the student's discret .
for the student who is in a hurri to get to the re gesta , she should skip on promptli to tableau <num> , part three .
for the other , carri on .
now , to extend the idea of the law of larg number , we shall turn to continu variabl .
and the student who ha not alreadi done so should take thi opportun to go back and revisit the danger bend tableau <num> .
with thi for prepar , we shall be equip to handl a gener law of larg number in the continuum .
now , the algebra detail is more pronounc , to be sure , but if the student keep her attent firmli focus on the essenc of the chebyshev argument that we've encount in the case of the binomi , then she will find that the argument more or less goe through seamlessli without essenti chang .
but of cours , we're go to need certain analogu of the kei concept we had seen in the develop earlier .
and accordingli , we will start with the consider of continu analogu of the idea of a probabilist center of mass and a probabilist moment of inertia in the continuum .
the form that chebyshev's inequ take in the continuum , and of cours you will recal that thi captur the like deviat of a continu chanc variabl from it expect .
the idea of independ trial and independ chanc variabl in the continuum .
we recal that independ is a rule of product .
when we move to the continuum , then thi rule of product is manifest , but in the context of densiti .
and final , thi subtl principl of addit , which is an abid principl which form a skein or thread which run right through the theori .
and we ar go to see how addit is manifest in the continuum .
we will take these in turn .
the idea of a probabilist center of mass expect and a probabilist moment of inertia varianc carri over smoothli from the discreet domain to the continu domain .
natur enough , all that the student will have to keep in mind is that the chanc variabl have gone from discret to continu , and so probabl mass give wai natur to probabl mass densiti , and sum segu natur into integr .
and if she keep these basic idea in mind then she will find the argument carri through without essenti chang .
so without further ado , let's begin by consid a continu sampl space .
the sampl space here is the real line .
we have a continuum of possibl .
recal that in such set , we call sampl point , these ideal outcom of experi , random variabl , an evoc terminolog which suggest that we have a chang experi , which is go to spit out a real number .
and that real number natur we'll call a random variabl .
again tradition we'll denot a gener such random variabl by an uppercas letter x .
so thi repres a chanc driven real number .
the question of cours is , well what is the probabl measur underli thi experi ?
and in the continuum thi is given to us by the specif of a densiti function .
recal that a probabl densiti function , p of x , repres a probabl mass per unit length at a point x .
sinc it repres a mass , it must satisfi the basic axiomat principl we've begun , wait for probabl measur , in particular , p of x ha to be a non neg function and it ha got to be properli normal .
the area under the curv must be unit .
now , with thi to begin consid the weight sum , let's call thi mu , of take a real number , x , weight it accord to the mass that your random variabl , uppercas x , place near littl x .
and simpli sum , or of cours , now in the continuum , the sum segu into an integr over all possibl for x .
what have we done here ?
we've form a weight integr of possibl valu over chanc experi .
and we've had a name for thi .
of cours , thi is exactli what we call the expect of x .
of cours , here's an express , for the expect of x in the continuum .
a begin student should feel free to argu by analog .
rememb , in discret set , we had probabl mass function which put probabl mass at individu point .
averag out the valu that the variabl take accord to the mass function give us an expect .
when on move to the continuum , mass function give wai natur to mass densiti , which ar unit of mass per unit length .
you have a continuum of possibl .
and sum now segu natur into integr .
an integr is noth but a limit styliz sum .
and therefor we have it complet in analog with what we've done in discret set for the binomi and the poisson variabl .
here now is an express for the expect of a continu random variabl .
thi term's for a probabilist center of mass .
now , befor i move on there is a small caveat that we have to put in place .
the integr we have here is formal an improp riemann integr .
it limit ar at minu infin and plu infin .
and if the student think back to her calculu class , she might recal that there is an inconveni possibl that integr of thi form do not converg .
all right .
so , we have to take cogniz of such a possibl .
we sai that thi express mu is the expect of x , also written e of x , provid that integr is absolut converg .
okai , now with that caveat in mind , let us think about idea of spread .
as alwai let's call sigma squar the integr squar deviat of x from it center mu .
x minu mu tell you the , the distanc of x from mu , posit or neg , squar it give us a squar distanc of x from mu , weight it in accord to the mass near the point x , p of x dx .
and integr over all possibl for x and you've got an expect squar deviat from the center .
of cours thi is what we call the varianc of a random variabl .
recal that varianc just connot a probabilist moment of inertia .
and now there you have it , complet by analog the discret set , sum segu natur to integr and otherwis noth much chang .
with just a littl caveat in the back of our mind that these thing actual have to converg for us to sai someth sensibl about them .
and so now we have these idea of a probabilist center of mass and a probabilist moment of inertia .
we call them the expect and the varianc .
now befor we move on , let us look at a small variat on thi theme , okai .
when we start with an experi , we have a coordin random variabl , sai uppercas x .
now it is frequent the case that we start with such a chanc observ and then we process it .
we pass thi chanc observ through a transform , a function .
and in thi wai , we obtain new chanc variabl .
so let's consid again the set , where we have a coordin random variabl , uppercas x , which is equip with a probabl law , a densiti , p of x .
now suppos we consid a transform , where we take x , pass it through a given function f , and spit out a valu y , of cours , you're veri familiar with such a notat from your elementari calculu class .
what is f ?
well , at the point of thi time be , i'm go to keep it veri , veri gener and abstract .
f could be ani gener , reason function that you could think of .
for exampl , you could think of y as x squar .
it's a quadrat function .
or y is e to the power of x , an exponenti function .
gener , ani reason function .
here's a transform at hand .
suppos we look at thi transform variabl and form the follow weight sum , or more precis , a weight integr .
as x wage abov all possibl , look at the valu of the function f of x at the point x .
weight it in accord with a mass that your coordin random variabl place near x , px , dx .
some overal possibl integr overal possibl and bob's your uncl .
there you've got a valu m .
again with the provid , the caveat , provid that integr converg .
and if the integr converg then we have noth to sai on the matter .
now what doe it remind you of ?
of cours it remind you of an expect .
what it is an expect of ?
as x rang of all possibl , you're look at the expect valu , the center of mass for f of x .
natur , we'll call thi the expect of f of x .
thi is now stand in place of our usual formul for expect for y .
in fact , thi is exactli the expect for y .
of cours you observ that if you want to try to write an expect for y , then our express involv in integr over y valu , weight accord to the mass densiti for y .
all we have done to obtain thi altern express is do what is veri familiar .
we'll run thi integr to a chang of variabl , replac y by f of x and there you have it .
you have an altern express for the expect of y .
thi turn out to be veri us .
becaus thi tell us that in order to find the probabilist central mass of y , the expect of y , it is not necessari to first figur out what the probabl measur of y is .
that is induc via a potenti complic process through p of x and f .
now , to find the central mass , it will suffic to simpli integr over all x possibl .
weight the valu , f of x .
of cours , we can probabl do someth veri similar with the varianc , right ?
let's call s squar the weight integr , where we look at the valu , f of x , at a given point x .
ask , how far is it from the center m ?
squar it .
now we've got the squar distanc from the center .
weight it in accord with a mass densiti near x .
integr overal possibl , and what do you have ?
natur , the varianc , the probabilist norm inertia of f of x .
in other word , we've got anoth express for the varianc of y .
now , thi is go to be us for us shortli .
but let me take it on step further becaus we have some low hang fruit here , and thi is go to be easi to grasp .
what if we have a coordin transform in more than on dimens , in two or more dimens ?
thi is now go to lead us into a function of two or more variabl .
and i should warn you that notat is go to ineluct get more complex .
we have now mani ball in the air , becaus there ar go to be mani trial .
and we're go to have to keep track off which ball is which , which trial is which .
notat is go to get more complex .
but , with that , as a provid , the essenti logic of the situat is not go to chang .
and if you keep your ey firmli on the logic of the situat , then all these express will becom complet transpar .
so to begin , suppos we have an experi , which compris a system of n probabilist trial .
the outcom of these trial , let's call natur x1 , x2 , x3 through xn .
x1 through xn repres random variabl , each from it own chanc experi .
the composit experi give us an ideal outcom , a sampl point , which is now a random vector , an integr of individu possibl .
thi random vector live in the euclidian n dimension space .
if you feel more comfort with someth concret , think of ns2 .
ar we deal with the euclidean plane ?
if ns3 , we're deal with ordinari three dimension space .
and , more gener , for higher valu of n , we ar deal with algebra in term of an order n tupl .
of cours , thi is a chanc driven experi .
each individu trial result in an apriori unpredict outcom .
so the composit outcom is go to be unpredict .
it's govern by a probabl law .
thei're deal in a continu space .
the law then is go to be cover by a mass densiti .
now is a function of n variabl , p of x1 through xn .
what doe thi connot ?
it connot the probabl mass , the unit and dimension volum at the point x1 through xn .
of cours , you would recal that a probabl densiti of thi natur ha to be posit and ha to integr to <num> .
these ar the posit and normal axiom .
now with thi to start , consid a transform .
think of these as coordin variabl or observ variabl .
a transform massag these variabl , and give rise to a new variabl y , which is a function of x1 through xn , think of your favorit function of n variabl and imagin that as your f .
y of cours , now is a new chanc variabl .
it inherit it chanc law , it qualiti measur from the underli measur from x1 through xn , which is govern by the densiti p of x1 through xn .
suppos we were interest in the expect of the varianc of y , we'll do exactli what we did in on dimens .
look at a point in n dimens , x1 through xn .
the function valu , the y valu , at that point is f of x1 through xn , weight it accord to the mass that a random vector place at and near that region .
integr over all possibl by allow x1 through xn to vari over a whole space .
the result give you a valu m , with the provisor assum that these integr converg .
and of cours thi is natur what you'll call the expect of f of x1 through xn .
thi is now anoth express , for the probablist center of mass of y , the expect of y .
we have a veri similar express for the varianc .
write s squar now , again , for the integr of the function valu at a point .
look at how far it is from m .
squar it .
that is the squar deviat of the y valu from the center m .
weight it accord to the polar mass densiti .
integr over all possibl .
and there you have it , the varianc of y .
and we'll write thi more evoc as a variant of f of x1 through xn .
for the reader who is a littl unsur about densiti , she should go back and refer to tableau six part two , where we flesh out these concept in some more detail .
with these under her belt , what she's got now is a wai of character in continu space , these idea of a probabilist center of mass and a probabilist varianc , the expect and the varianc .
if the student cast her ey over our deriv of the law of larg number in the case of the binomi and the set of pole .
she might feel that the analysi , the usag of a squar and chebyshev artific had a somewhat accident charact .
a serendipit feel to it .
chebyshev discov inequ in <num> .
and there ar few result the histori of mathemat and scienc which have continu to be so profoundli us .
so thi segment then will allow the student to get a feel for why the inequ is so ubiquit .
it is not special pure to the binomi or the poisson , but is in fact a veri gener statement about chanc occurr .
let us consid chebyshev in the context of a continu set .
thi underli sampl space is the real line .
we have a continuum of possibl point to mark our chanc driven experi .
the outcom of the experi , the sampl point , is a random variabl denot uppercas x .
it come equip with a densiti and mass function per unit length , p of x .
and let us assum that thi mass densiti ha an expect mu and a varianc sigma squar .
what is the probabl that , for a given deviat tau , some posit number tau .
that x deviat from it center , from mu , by tau or more .
so we should , paus and take stock .
figur out what that blank space is .
the measur , and the event .
let's take these in stride .
first , our outcom ar sampl point , take valu of the real line .
the probabl measur is induc a densiti function p of x , which ha to be non neg .
that's to satisfi the posit , the axiom .
and it ha to be properli normal to have unit area .
so on the screen you seen an exampl for gener densiti function .
now we understand both the sampl space and the probabl measur in question .
what is the effect of interest for us ?
so as alwai let us upper case a to denot the in event of the interest .
and we recal that an event in thi set is a subset of the sampl space and therefor must be a subset of real valu .
what real valu trigger occurr of thi event .
well all real valu littl x such that x differ from mu in absolut valu by the deviat tau or more .
so that simpl inequ , the absolut valu of x minu mu be bigger than tau describ all valu x .
which fall within the provinc of thi particular event .
now a figur's worth a thousand word as thei sai , so let's veri quickli try to hone in graphic as to what the set mean .
for the figur at hand , for the densiti at hand we have a two hump densiti , a bactrian camel if you will .
and we can see that the central mass should lie somewher between the two hump .
possibl shade slightli toward the broader , bigger hump , and inde it is .
sai here is where the central mass mu where thi particular properti law is .
and start from mu you move awai by tau in either direct , to mu plu tau and mu minu tau .
thi region from mu minu tau to mu plu tau is a region of close to mu , allow by our event .
what ar we interest in ?
the region to the right of mu plu tau and to the left of mu minu tau .
and so exactli , the subset of point a is describ exactli by those two region , those two subset .
now , thi complet describ the event at hand of cours , but thi is not quit a viscer formul .
and cork an ey at an analysi of the binomi , we try to massag thi into a slightli more conveni form .
take the inequ again , absolut valu of x minu mu exceed tau .
if we divid both side by the posit tau , then we get an equival inequ which sai that the ratio of the absolut valu of x minu mu to tau should be bigger than <num> .
right ?
and therefor , our event a describ as the collect of point x satisfi thi new inequ .
now recal that a number which is bigger than <num> ha a squar which is also bigger than <num> .
and in fact , for everi number bigger than <num> , it squar is bigger than <num> , and if it squar is bigger than <num> , the number must be bigger than <num> .
so , thi is equal to sai that a squar of an inequ is also true , in other word , a compris all those point x .
for which the squar of x minu mu divid by tau squar exce <num> .
thi you will recal is the squar artific that chebyshev introduc in <num> .
we'll now come to a right understand of the sampl space , the probabl measur and the event at hand .
it ha now come time to execut and evalu a probabl .
so , let's start with thi .
recal we're deal with a real line sampl space and the event of interest deal with a deviat from a mean valu , right ?
the region x for which x minu mu squar over tau squar exce <num> .
we now have to comput a probabl and of cours the probabl of the set and the continuum is an area under a curv .
it's go to be an integr .
so you want to look at the area which is in that particular region .
now let us execut .
we ar interest in the probabl , read it out in word , that x deviat from mu in absolut valu by tau or more .
thi , of cours , is given by an integr , right ?
a limit sum .
it's go to be the area under the curv indic on the figur .
and formal , algebra , in calculu , we'll write thi as an integr over the set a of the densiti function , p of x dx .
thi is the area under the curv of p of x over the set a .
now , let's rewrit thi ever so slightli differ .
what we mean by thi is the same as sai that in the region of interest , the point x contribut a weight of <num> now .
right ?
<num> time p of x is of cours p of x .
and outsid the region of interest , point x contribut a weight of zero , noth .
well of cours , i've done no , no damag to the , the ident , right ?
it is multipli p of x by <num> , just give me p of x .
so what ?
but here's where the chebyshev idea come to the fore .
notic that in the region of integr or all the x's that compris of set a .
in that region , the squar of x minu mu divid by tau squar is bigger than <num> .
and therefor , if i replac the red <num> by x minu mu , the whole squar , divid by tau squar , i'd have increas the integr .
and therefor , increas the valu of the integr .
okai , now we ar get somewher .
why is thi us ?
becaus squar ar mathemat veri amiabl to analysi .
you'll see why in a moment .
but a littl more housekeep first .
we now have an integr of a squar , weight accord to a non neg mass function .
and thi integr is over a region , a subset of the real line .
but the integrand is a squar and a non neg mass densiti function .
the integrand is non neg everywher on the real line .
and so , if i take the integr and expand it domain from the set a to the entir real line , i'm onli ad more posit valu .
i can onli make the integr bigger .
and suddenli now i've got an integr over the whole line of a squar weight accord to a densiti function .
we're home free .
let's observ that in the denomin the deviat squar tau squar is a constant .
it doe not depend upon x , the variabl of integr and can therefor come out of the integr .
so thei pull it out , we've got now a rework integr .
have we gone ani further forward ?
have we got ferrata ?
paus for a moment and look , long and concentratedli , at that integr on the right .
doe it look familiar ?
it should .
it look like an expect squar deviat from our center , doe it not ?
inde it is , in fact .
it is exactli the varianc of the random variabl , x .
and therefor , the probabl that x deviat from mu by more than tau is bound by an express involv the varianc or the expect squar spread divid the deviat squar .
let's quickli summar our discoveri .
thi is chebyshev's resplend inequ .
few inequ have had such an impact over such a period of time .
now , what is thi tell us as a follow ?
if the varianc is small then the probabl of a deviat from mu is small .
that is veri intuit , rememb , varianc tell us someth about the expect squar spread around the center .
and you're sai , well if expect squar spread is small .
then the variabl tend to be concentr near the center .
it is unlik to have a larg peregrin move awai from the center .
thi is veri intuit , veri reason .
it also suggest to us that the proper unit of distanc from the center should be in term of the squar root of the varianc , the spread , the standard deviat , sigma .
here's a concret question .
what if we look at , three standard deviat from the center ?
what if tau is three time sigma ?
well thei just put a tau equal three time sigma into chebyshev's inequ .
and we observ that the probabl that you deviat by three standard deviat or more from the center is no more than <num> in <num> .
approxim <num> .
of cours , now thi is a fairli precis statement .
but to put it in context , we should put in a snoga , slogan in place .
and without ani further ado , here's a slogan .
what we've discov is the probabl that at chanc variabl on the continuum deviat from it expect valu , whatev it is , by more than three standard deviat , is small .
it's no more than about <num> .
in actual tend to be much smaller than that .
becaus chebyshev's inequ for all it virtu doe not pretend to be particularli sharp , right ?
if you tighten the result you'll find that the bound is excess gener in mani case .
and therefor , in the vast major of instanc that a student will encount chanc , she will find that you have concentr around the expect .
the center of mass of the experi within three standard deviat with veri high probabl .
now thi is alreadi tell us someth about the intuit base of probabl .
it now valid for us 's idea of center , the expect .
as well as hi idea of spread , sigma , the standard deviat .
both of these now have been put in a formal foot , and connect glorious with our intuit idea of what center and spread should mean .
but chebyshev's inequ is to have much deeper ramif .
it lead to the law of larg number .
and we shall see thi next .
recal that independ is at it heart a rule of product .
as we've alreadi seen in tableau nine part on , in the case of a composit experi in the discret set a product space wa engend with a product measur obtain by multipli individu mass function .
thi intuit carri over seamlessli into the continuum , with a provisor of cours that the mass function in the discret domain ar replac by mass densiti in the continu domain .
as georg pullei suggest , it is alwai wise to begin with the simplest non trivial version of the problem , and in thi case the simplest non trivial version involv two independ trial .
accordingli , consid two trial lead to continu chanc variabl , random variabl , sai x and y .
x is govern by a densiti function , sai p sub <num> , y is govern by a densiti function , sai p sub <num> .
the trial ar said to be independ , if togeth thei engend a composit experi where the sampl space is describ by a pair of real number .
in other word the sampl space of the euclidean plane , and the pair of real number form the composit outcom of thi experi ar govern by a mass densiti in two dimens , which is separ into a product of two on dimension mass densiti .
thi is veri much what we saw in the discret domain .
now , why doe thi impli independ in the sens of multipl rule for fx .
well , the argument goe exactli the same fashion sum's segwai into integr it's to verifi independ .
suppos a is a subset of real number , b is anoth subset of real number , and we want to know the probabl of the joint occurr of the event that the first outcom x is in a and the second experi's outcom is in b .
so now , we have a composit experi with two individu experi compos it .
what doe thi look like ?
well , natur we're think of event as set , a is a subset of the real line in thi case i've shown you an interv , b is anoth subset of the real line , anoth interv in thi particular exampl .
and we're interest in that set in the plane for which the first coordin variabl li in a , and the second coordin variabl li in b .
of cours , you recal there's a cartesian product of a with b .
and so , the event at hand is the set of all pair x , y , for which x li in a , and y li in b , in other word , the cartesian product of a with b .
if a and b ar rect , ar interv , then the cartesian product is a rectangl as you sai .
how do you comput a probabl ?
simpli , accumul the mass densiti over the region of interest or in other word , integr out the mass densiti over thi cartesian product .
natur when face with a two dimension integr we simplifi by write it as an iter integr .
what is the region of interest ?
well , x ha to ri , lie in the region a , and a y ha to lie in the region b , and so we have now an iter integr .
and we observ that the integr , sinc it's separ into a function of x and a function of y .
the intregrand separ the two piec and therefor so do the integr .
and so we promptli write our integr down as a product of an integr over x with an integr over y , and we start at the express on the right .
the first integr is the integr of the densiti function of x over the region a and of cours thi stand for the probabl that the first coordin variabl li in a .
likewis , a second integr is the integr of the densiti function of the second coordin variabl over a region b .
it stand for the probabl that the second coordin variabl take valu in b .
take stock , the probabl of the joint occurr of the event that x li in a and y li in b is product of the two probabl that x isn't a with the probabl that y isn't b .
or in other red , event specifi by x alon ar independ of event specifi by y alon .
if we specifi for the composit experi in the product space a product measur which is inherit from a product of two mass densiti .
then thi impli independ for all event specifi by x with respect to event specifi by y .
all right , now onc we understand thi wai veri quickli gener through a gener set with sai n trial .
imagin that we have n individu constitut independ trial result in continu variabl , and now we're go to need a more cumbersom mutat that we have now n variabl to deal with .
natur , we'll identifi the trial by subscript <num> , <num> , <num> , up to n , let x sub <num> be the first quantum variabl , x sub <num> the second variabl , x sub n the last variabl .
each of these experi is govern by an underli probabl law .
x1 ha a mass densiti function p1 , x2 ha a densiti p2 , xn ha a densiti pn , by sai the trial ar independ we mean that the composit experi give rise to a vector , an n tupl of chanc variabl .
the sampl space here is implicitli n dimension eccludian space , and the probabl measur is inherit from a product measur , where the joint densiti of these end variabl is factor , is separ into a product of each of the end individu mass densiti .
verifi independ is , follow the same pattern .
suppos a1 is a region of the real line , a2 is in the region , an is still end of the region .
what ar the chanc that the first coordin variabl li in a1 , the second coordin variabl li in a2 and so on with the init coordin variabl ly in an ?
natur , we integr out the join densiti , the mass densiti which now ha unit of probabl mass but in unit and dimension volum .
integr out over the region of interest , which is the cartesian product of a1 with a2 and so on through an .
doe n dimension integr simplifi the game becaus the integrand ha separ into a product of individu on dimension function , and so thi integr separ into a product of n1 dimension integr .
each of the integr on the right repres a probabl , and so we find that the right hand side evolv into a product of n individu probabl .
and again , we verifi the rule of product .
the probabl of x1 take valu a in a region a1 , x2 in a region a2 , and so on , xn in a region an is a product of the individu probabl .
we verifi again , that event specifi individu by x1 , x2 , through xn ar independ .
but , if the student look back at the arg , what she will realiz that , essenti the same argument carri through .
for event specifi by disjoint group of these xs , or that happen is that the integr will now separ into on group here , on group here , on group here , and again , you have a rule of product .
again , independ is manifest in a product space when we have a product measur .
addit plai of subtl role right through the theori of chanc .
and it is go to be manifest here in a result on addit of expect and varianc .
so let us begin , begin with the simplest set of two variabl .
and to keep idea clear , let's focu on a set where we have independ chanc experi .
so we consid two independ trial result in continu chanc variabl x and y .
x is govern by some probabl law , a on dimension densiti , sai p <num> , with expect mu <num> and a varianc sigma <num> squar .
y likewis is govern by some on dimension densiti , sai p <num> , with expect mu <num> and varianc sigma <num> squar .
the underli composit experi here is engend by a product space of pair x , y .
and the underli product measur is specifi as a product of the individu on dimension densiti function .
okai , so here we have it .
now befor we launch into a categor of expect , it'll be wise to bear in mind the veri basic chang of variabl theorem for expect .
so consid a transform .
think of x and y as your coordin variabl , and a measur , a transform which take x and y into a function , f of x and y .
so now we have a new chanc variabl , f of x and y .
how do we comput it expect ?
well , a simpl wai to go about it is to look at the valu of f of x , y at a given point x , y , weight accord to the mass densiti of the pair at the point p of x , y .
in thi case , of cours , we have assum that p of x , y factor into a product of two individu on dimension function .
and integr out over all possibl , some ar in the limit of all possibl .
and bob's your uncl , you've got an express for the expect .
how about the varianc ?
well , we can do it exactli in the same kind of argument .
we start at a given point x , y , at the valu of f of x , y .
consid it distanc from the expect valu e of f of x , y .
now that differ squar give us a squar distanc from the expect , weight accord to the mass densiti of the pair .
in thi case , the mass densiti of the pair is a product of on dimension function .
and integr out over all possibl .
so thi is a veri simpl chang of variabl theorem .
now let's appli it to the veri simpl function where we have a sum .
and so suppos f of x , y is x plu y .
what can we now sai about it expect ?
well , by the chang of variabl theorem , the expect valu of the sum can be written as take the valu x plu y , weight accord to the mass densiti , integr our all possibl possibl for x and y , and there you have it .
now the fact that the function we ar deal with ha got such a simpl addit form here ha got an immedi consequ .
in the integrand , we have a sum , x plu y .
but integr is addit , right ?
of cours , thi is just a manifest of the associ properti of addit .
name , to wit , that addit can be done in ani order .
and so if we isol the term x and then the term y , we can put togeth the contribut of each and add them up .
and so we can write down thi doubl integr as a doubl integr over x time a densiti function plu a doubl integr of y time the same densiti function .
and now we've got on the right hand side two doubl integr , and we evalu them natur by iter , on integr at a time .
so now we notic that the integrand ar separ into function of x time function of y , and therefor , the integr separ as well .
and so the first doubl integr give rise to a product of two on dimension integr .
the second doubl integr give rise to an analog product of two on dimension integr , and i've color code them for visibl .
now take a look at each of those singl integr on the right hand side .
do you recogn them ?
paus , think about it , and then proce .
now observ that the first integr , color in green , is just the expect of the first chanc variabl , big x .
the second integr , color code in red , is just the area under the densiti function p <num> .
by normal , that area ha to be unit .
the third of the integr is the area under the densiti function p <num> .
by normal of that measur , that integr is unit .
and final , the last on dimension integr , color code in green , is just the expect of y .
and we have thi beauti addit properti .
the expect valu of x plu y is the expect of x plu the expect of y .
now thi actual alreadi suffic for our purpos .
but there's a deeper addit properti just lurk under the analysi , and it would be a shame if we didn't pull it out .
okai .
what if the variabl were not independ ?
well , in that case , we can't us the joint densiti as a product of densiti .
we ar to go back to a joint densiti p of x , y .
so let's write it down in term of p of x , y .
again , in the integrand , we have a sum x plu y and the doubl integr separ into a sum of two integr .
and the chang of variabl theorem tell us that the first doubl integr on the right is just expect of x .
the second doubl integr on the right is just the expect of y .
and so thi properti , thi addit properti of expect , doe not even demand independ .
the expect of a sum is a sum of expect , even if the underli variabl ar depend , and for sure if the variabl ar independ .
but independ is go to be need when we turn to varianc .
and we do those next .
so let's start with our observ .
if we start with two coordin variabl , x and y , which ar independ , and we form their sum , we have discov in particular the expect of a sum is a sum of expect .
what can we sai about the varianc of a sum ?
let's promptli appeal to the chang of variabl theorem again .
identifi f of x , y with x plu y .
the varianc of x plu y is obtain by allow x and y to vari over the entir coordin plane .
and at each point x , y , look at the sum x plu y .
compar it with the expect of the sum , which we've discov is the sum of expect .
squar it .
now we got a squar discrep .
weight it accord to the joint densiti , which , in our case now , becaus of independ , is a product of densiti .
and integr out .
there you go .
now , thi look complex admittedli .
but let's see if we can do a littl algebra massag to simplifi it .
insid the squar bracket in the integrand , we fe , find two term , an x plu y and a sum of expect .
let's group them by variabl .
so associ the expect of the chanc variabl big x with the coordin variabl littl x .
associ the expect of the chanc variabl big y with the coordin variabl littl y .
all right , and i can rearrang thi sum , and now i'll put thing insid round bracket and we have , instead of squar bracket , two term in round bracket .
and we're go to squar the sum .
well , the squar of a sum , we know , by the simplest applic of the binomi theorem .
a plu b squar is a squar plu <num> a b plu b squar .
identifi a with x minu expect of big x .
identifi b with y minu the expect of big y .
and now we've got three term that the squar of the , the term in the squar bracket expand it .
integr , again , is addit .
an integr of a sum of three term is a sum of three integr .
let's write each of these down , on at a time .
so first , we have an integr involv the term littl a squar .
and then we have an integr involv the term <num> time littl a time littl b .
and then we have an integr involv the term b squar .
and now we're expand out into three term .
all right , so our express is get algebra more cumbrou , right ?
what is of the essenc here is that we have three term on the right .
let's give them name , uppercas a , b and c , respect .
and so our task now is to evalu a , b and c .
now let's turn to thi and see what we have .
let's start with a .
a is the integr of a squar .
the integrand ha devolv into a product of a function of x and a function of y , and therefor we iter the integr and write thi down as a product of two integr .
on over x , on over y .
excel .
now , take a good hard look at the two term on the right .
do thei strike a chord ?
well , thei should .
the first term is just the varianc of x .
the second term is the area under densiti function .
by normal , it is <num> .
and therefor , the entir term , a , the first term on the right , wa just the varianc of x .
let's promptli turn our attent to the term we call c .
again , we have an integr .
the integrand devolv into a product of function of x and y .
we'll write it as two on dimension integr .
and now , the analysi carri through in exactli the same wai as for a , with the role of x and y interchang .
and therefor , without further ado , we see that c is identifi with the varianc of y .
now , and that leav the more cumbrou term in the middl , b .
the factor <num> come out of the integr as a constant .
and again , the integrand is a product of a function of x and a function of y .
the integrand separ .
and so the doubl integr separ into a product of two on dimension integr .
on over x , on over y .
now let's take a look at , sai , the first of these integr over x .
right ?
a good hard look at the integrand show the integrand is a differ .
but integr is addit .
the integr of a differ is a differ of integr .
and so we promptli write thi down as the integr of x time p <num> , from which you subtract out the integr of an expect time p <num> .
but the expect of x is a constant , sai mu <num> .
it can come out of the integr , and now we have a simpl express .
the first of the integr on the left is exactli the expect of x .
the second integr is unit by normal .
and therefor , we have the differ of the expect of x with itself , or <num> .
the first integr is <num> , and for the same reason the second integr is <num> .
a product of <num> and <num> is <num> .
and so , without further ado , that big complex term in the middl , b , vanish quietli .
like the snow of yesteryear , it disappear and doe not troubl us ani further .
all right , let's put all of thi togeth .
what do we have ?
the varianc of a sum ha got three contribut , a , b and c .
a wa the varianc of x , b wa <num> , c wa the varianc of y , and so we've discov that when the variabl ar independ , then the varianc of the sum is a sum of the varianc .
now the addit of expect is at some level to be expect .
after all , expect is an averag .
averag is a sum .
a limit sum is an integr .
and sum can be done in ani order .
and therefor , expect should be addit , and , in fact , it is .
the fact that the variabl ar depend or not is irrelev to the addit of expect .
but for varianc , we need someth a bit stronger .
varianc involv a squar , and a squar is intrins not linear .
to recov linear from a squar , we ar go to need more structur .
and that structur is provid by independ .
the curiou listen might want to go back and ask , can i relax independ ?
inde , you can .
but it's clear that someth along those line is need .
so i shall not dig into it ani further at thi point .
we have more than enough for our purpos .
let's summar our discoveri in two slogan .
the first of the slogan for expect , expect is addit , with no qualif .
thi turn out to be a fact of surpass import in the theori and the applic .
in particular , expect is certainli addit when the variabl ar independ .
and the second slogan , varianc is remark also addit , but with the proviso that the underli variabl ar , in fact , independ .
now with these two tendril of addit in hand , we ar now equip to launch into what should we show as an equal sai about a sum of independ variabl .
thi come next .
our focu now is on the efficaci of the estim .
how well doe the rel frequenc of success in a random sampl actual approxim a true underli popul proport ?
but befor we dive into the technic , it would be well to step back and take a look at what underli all our calcul .
and that is , the idea of a random sampl .
i will phrase our discuss to follow in the context of poll , but what i'm go to sai is go to be valid for ani random sampl gener from ani chanc experi .
now , there is an art to a random sampl .
what is the first step in the idea of a random sampl ?
well , the first step is to construct a sequenc of trial .
and there ar two kei featur .
on , the idea of independ , and two , the idea that the trial evolv from an underli chanc experi .
let us take these on at a time .
first , thi central and kei idea of independ .
thi is the idea that run a thread through all of the theori of chanc .
the kei principl is keen of independ .
what doe independ mean ?
at it foundat level , from a pure formal point of view , independ impli a rule of product .
formal , that when on look at a sampl gener by independ trial , then probabl ar obtain by multipli raw probabl for each trial .
what doe thi mean in the context of a poll ?
now for a poll , we have some underli popul , fix , and for the purpos of the poll , immut , it doe not chang .
and sampl impli that we do it fairli , that everi member of the popul ha an equal chanc of be select in ani given trial .
in other word , a member of the popul is chosen uniformli at random .
but that is not all .
the moment an individu is select and queri or look at , it is imper from the formal point of view that that individu is replac in the popul befor an independ second trial is conduct .
in other word , sampl is with replac .
the listen can easili see why the replac idea is import , especi when on consid small popul .
let's sai on ha a popul of , of three peopl .
the moment on queri someth to on person , if that person isn't replac in the popul , the next sampl element is drawn from a popul of two peopl .
we have chang the underli chanc condit .
the popul ha chang from trial to trial .
now admittedli , when popul ar larg , thi effect becom vanishingli small .
sai if a popul ha got size of <num> million , then it make littl matter whether on member is replac or not , especi in the context of rel small sampl of hundr or thousand .
but thi is an import guid principl to be kept in mind .
sampl ha to be done with replac , and uniformli from the entir popul .
so at heart , the idea of independ engend a product space and a product probabl measur where probabl ar obtain by multipli .
if a listen will cast her mind to tableau ten , and when we look at the construct of the binomi distribut , she will realiz that at the heart of the construct wa a simpl multipl of probabl .
so thi is the first kei central idea in the notion of a random sampl .
in an applic , the user will be well advis to look at the proven of a sampl befor do ani analysi .
if somebodi report and sai , i've got such , such and such sampl , it will be well to cast an ey at the condit under which the sampl wa gener .
in practic , of cours , we deviat from these assumpt , these steril and beauti assumpt of independ in variou wai .
the question then is , how much of an artifact do we introduc in practic ?
and to the extent that the assumpt of independ is violat , to that as , extent , our conclus ar suspect .
so thi is our first kei tenet , independ .
but there is a second tenet .
and that is that the sampl is done by sampl consist from some underli chanc experi , a target experi which doe not chang from sampl point to sampl point .
now , it is veri easi to introduc bia into an otherwis honest experi .
the sampl might be done independ , but the target experi might well not be the on that we think we have in mind .
bia mai be consciou or unconsci .
when it's consciou , of cours , thi is as talk and trade of the unscrupul poster .
bia can aris in sever differ flavor .
and it is again import to understand the nuanc of how uncertainti and bias can creep into these exampl .
the first exampl of bia is , when in sampl from a popul , there is a bia in select .
now , let me give you a coupl of exampl .
in an earlier gener , the gender were veri firmli align with differ rule in societi , right ?
so for exampl , in the earli part of the 20th centuri , in mani societi men work outsid the home .
women stai at home and took care of the household .
now , imagin a poll construc , a , conduct , let's sai , in the 1950s when telephon were just begin to becom widespread .
and a telephon poll is con , is conduct , and the pollster sai , well , let me call home at , let's sai , noon , or <num> p . m .
would there be a problem in conduct such a poll ?
assum , of cours , that the number ar chosen independ , or as close to independ as we can manag .
nonetheless , it is clear that a select bia is introduc , becaus who is at home in the middl of the dai ?
well , the homemak .
even if the poll is conduct independ , the sampl then reflect that post percent of the popul who ar at home in the middl of the dai .
that percentag of the popul , while an honest account for that subgroup , mai or mai not repres the popul at larg .
and so , here's an exampl of a select bia that ha insidi crept in to the sampl process .
here is anoth histor exampl .
the year wa <num> , and thi wa a year of a us presidenti elect .
the two primari candid were a democrat , franklin delano roosevelt on the on hand , and a littl known republican name alf landon on the other .
and thei were contest thi elect .
histori buff might recal that thi wa the time of the great depress , right ?
the economi were plung into chao , famili were thrown into strait .
now , in thi elect , of cours , there , there wa intens interest in who wa go to be the like winner , becaus that wa go to like determin the polici for the countri go forward .
a highli read magazin , the literari digest , at that time decid to conduct a poll on who the like winner of that presidenti elect wa .
thei sent out ten million questionnair , receiv two million questionnair back , and conclud that the republican alf landon wa go to win in a landslid .
now , the us polit elect system is a bit arcan .
it's a winner take all system , for those who don't understand it , where each state vote , and the major vote determin who win that state .
each state then contribut a certain number of what ar call elector colleg vote .
and in <num> , there were <num> elector colleg vote avail , and the presidenti candid who win the major of those win the elect .
the literari digest predict that landon wa go to win <num> of the <num> elector colleg vote on offer .
thi is a landslid .
of cours , histori show thei were wrong .
roosevelt won , and won convincingli .
in fact , roosevelt won by on of the largest margin in histori .
thi had been predict by a young man name georg gallup , who had conduct a poll on ten thousand individu .
not veri larg , is it , compar to a ten million .
and he observ that base on the poll number , he predict that all but a small hand of six elector colleg vote would go roosevelt's wai .
in other word , a diametr oppos predict .
and he wa right .
now , why would a poll involv ten of thousand trump a poll involv million ?
the answer , of cours , resid in an insidi bia that had not been factor in by literari digest .
it turn out that the major of the reader of literari digest were in rural commun .
and then in the unit state , as now , rural commun tend to vote strongli republican .
and therefor , the literari digest report an accur estim , but for rural commun .
of cours , but rural commun do not compris the entireti of the countri .
the gallup poll , on the other hand , look at the entir countri in fair and just proport , and therebi came up with a much more accur estim , 'kai ?
of cours , thi wa then the origin of the gallup organ and the preval gallup poll of todai .
so , select bia is a critic and import thing to look at .
when on ha a sampl , on should cast an ey and sai , wa thi sampl taken from the entir popul uniformli , or wa there some kind of select bia which focus on a subgroup of the popul ?
a second idea of bia come around , about becaus , folk ar impati .
look , and thi is the issu of non respons , or what is also call refus bia .
the listen todai is well awar with the common practic of call come in to solicit opinion to sell product , right ?
i am a probabilist , but i must confess that when i get home late in the even and i'm readi for my dinner , and i get a phone call from somebodi who want my opinion on someth or the other , in principl , as a good probabilist i should probabl answer so that their , the sampl is unbias and repres .
in practic , i end up sai , no , i don't wish to answer , and i hang up .
here is an exampl of a refus bia .
the difficult , thi is veri difficult to combat , you see , becaus peopl natur valu their time and don't want to spend the time answer a stranger's question .
but the moment on refus , then implicit here is that the sampl that is actual obtain is obtain from that subport of the popul who ar will to answer question .
in other word , thi is a coalit of the will .
to the extent that that subgroup is repres of the entir popul or not repres , you'll find that thi sampl is repres of the whole popul or not .
look , and thi is veri , veri difficult to combat .
still anoth area of bia aris in the word of the question , as a question of phrase .
now i've mention , thi can be consciou or unconsci , but word ar power .
thei convei mean .
and if on us them incauti , then what is understood by the listen mai be veri differ from what is intend by the speaker .
let me give you a , an exampl , not entir hypothet , about how an unscrupul pollster can shade a poll in ani direct she wish .
imagin that there is a countri where at some point in time , a law provid health care to retir citizen ha been provid .
in other word , thi is a senior citizen benefit which allow them to have health benefit from the govern after thei retir .
suppos thi is in place , but there's no such law for the gener popul .
imagin then that an enterpris leader decid that he want to provid a law which provid a blanket coverag of insur for the entir popul .
now , good peopl can debat whether thi is a good idea or a bad idea .
but , let's sai we want to get the sentiment of the popul on whether thi is a good idea or a bad idea .
here ar a coupl of question on could pose to the popul .
let us sai that the exist law , which provid health care for senior , ha been work for mani year , and ha been work well .
suppos on ask a respond , would we want our children to have the same health care benefit that our parent do ?
now natur , when on fo , pa , pose a question like thi , we all want good thing for our children , and therefor , the tendenc is to sai , oh ye , of cours .
but suppos on were to phrase the question in the follow wai .
do you want a nameless bureaucrat to control your health care ?
of cours , the wai the question is word is extraordinari pejor .
he feel veri bad .
he sai , certainli not .
i want to be in control of my own destini .
but at it heart , both question touch upon a common underli structur .
the posit health care benefit that the senior ar receiv ar provid by the govern .
it's a govern entiti .
and in both case , we ar refer to someth which ha been provid by the govern .
but depend on how we phrase the question , we can elicit veri differ respons from the same person .
and so , phrase is import .
in a good poll , the pollster will make an effort to be complet unbias and present question raw , without tilt it in on direct or the other .
when on evalu a poll , on should alwai look at thi axiom .
of cours , you see when on is given data , we have veri littl control over the data .
we have what it is .
but if we want to begin an analysi on it , we should alwai begin with the question of , ar the data sound ?
is thi realli a random sampl from the experi i had in mind ?
is independ approxim visibl ?
is there bia ?
now with thi for background , let us now return to the question of the poll .
a consider of a sum of two variabl give us almost all we need for sum of mani variabl .
but there is on technic point .
it is as well to take stock of it , it'll help or to reinforc and settl our idea of independ .
and then we can move on with a gener formul under our belt .
so accordingli let us start with a set of repeat , independ trial .
and we ar go to think of independ variabl with a common densiti .
so let's sai x is a chanc variabl , a gener chanc variabl .
and let's sai it's got a mass densiti function p of x .
and let us suppos that x ha got an expect mu and a varianc sigma squar .
we consid x1 , x2 , x3 , and so forth , a potenti infinit sequenc of such coordin variabl .
to be independ realiz of variabl with the same densiti as x .
in other word , we have a set of repeat independ trial .
now in thi set what is go to be of interest to us is when we form partial sum of the sequenc .
so the idea here is instead of look at a singl chanc experi where we add a certain number of variabl .
we look at them in sequenc .
we look at an infinit collect of such chanc experi by look at variou partial sum .
in our usual notat now , let s1 be just x1 .
s2 is a sum of the first two coordin variabl , s3 is a sum of the first three coordin variabl and sn is a sum of the first n coordin variabl .
n , of cours , is a gener number and we're go to start think about n as it becom larger and larger and larger .
now in thi set a simpl observ smooth our path and allow us to connect a gener set to the set of the sum of two variabl that we've alreadi seen .
accordingli let start with s2 .
we recogn that x1 is just s1 .
so we can rewrit s2 as s1 plu x2 .
similarli , s3 is the sum of x1 , x2 and x3 .
but x1 plu x2 is s2 .
and therefor , s3 is s2 plu x3 .
and now we see immedi pattern .
so for the nth of these partial sum , sn is sn minu <num> plu xn .
let us focu on the last line on the screen .
sn is a sum of sn minu <num> and xn .
a kei and beauti observ mai be made at thi point .
to whit , that sn minu <num> , the sum of the first n minu <num> coordin variabl , is independ of xn .
the listen might feel that thi seem obviou after all sn minu on depend on the first n minu on coordin variabl onli .
and the first n minu on coordin variabl x1 through xn minu on ar individu , sever , and collect independ of the nth coordin variabl , xn .
and certainli that is true .
how do we go about verifi thi ?
well , the pattern follow exactli the procedur we took to verifi that x1 through xn were individu independ .
and here we go .
so to verifi independ , we have a variabl sn minu <num> and a variabl xn .
we ar go to ask the joint probabl , the probabl of the intersect of two event , that sn minu <num> take valu in a certain rang and xn take valu in anoth rang .
so , think of a as some sub collect of real valu , mayb an interv or a collect of interv .
b as some other interv perhap or some other collect of interv .
and if you're ask for the joint probabl of the event that sn minu <num> li in a and xn li in b .
how do we go about do thi ?
a quick saniti check .
what is the underli sampl space ?
well , the space we're deal with , as far as x1 through xn ar concern , is n dimension euclidian space .
so we have an n dimension euclidian space , we're go to identifi the event of interest in it .
what is the event of interest .
well , that portion of the space where the first n minu <num> coordin add up to a number which li in a region a and the last coordin li in a region b .
we simpli add up or in our case now , integr over that region .
so accordingli the notat is look a littl formid , but the logic now is impecc .
we're cut up a region of n dimension space describ by the follow relationship .
the first n minu <num> coordin variabl must add up to a number which li in a region a .
and the last coordin variabl must lie in b .
and what ar we ad up , integr ?
natur , the joint densiti of the n coordin variabl .
and here is where independ come to plai a kei role .
becaus the variabl ar independ , the joint densiti is a product of the individu densiti .
but each of the individu densiti is describ by exactli the same function .
thei all have the same distribut .
thei're all govern by the same densiti p .
and so you have p of x1 , which tell you the densiti of the first coordin variabl at the point x1 , multipli p of x2 , the densiti of a second coordin variabl at the point x2 , and so on down .
and there you have it .
now onc you've got an integrand which peel off so beautifulli into a product of individu piec .
then natur enough we can separ the interv and do the integr iter .
and we break it up into two piec , a segment where we ar do an integr over the first n minu <num> coordin variabl .
over what region ?
well , exactli the region where the sum of those variabl li an a , and then the second integr where we have xn ly in b .
now observ that the last integr is accumul the probabl over the region b for the innat variabl ?
or , in a more familiar notat , thi stand for the probabl that the innat coordin variabl take valu in b .
now that's nice and simpl .
what about the big ugli multipl integr mess in front ?
well if we look at it carefulli it sai , thi describ an event involv a first n minu <num> coordin variabl where their sum li in a .
or , in other word , it describ a probabl that sn minu <num> li in a .
and there you have it .
the probabl of the intersect of the two event is a product of the two probabl .
ns and minu <num> and xm therefor ar independ .
with thi kei observ under our belt , now let's go ahead and see what happen to expect and varianc for the partial sum .
so let's build up a stori onc step at a , at a time .
start at and equal to <num> .
well , s1 is x1 , so thi is trivial .
the expect of s1 is that the same of x1 .
it's mu .
the varianc of s1 is sigma squar .
the first non trivial case is s2 .
but s2 is s1 plu x2 .
s1 is independ of x2 .
both these variabl have to got mean our expect mu and both of them have got varianc sigma squar .
and therefor the expect of s2 by our addit result is twice mu .
the varianc of s2 .
but addit becaus the summand ar independ is twice sigma squar .
oh , and now it's easi to build it up .
s3 will add s2 to x3 .
and if we keep do thi .
sn .
we'll add sn minu <num> to xn .
again , now we have two independ variabl which ar be ad .
and therefor , by induct process , it's now clear that the expect of sn is n time mu .
and the varianc of sn is n time sigma squar .
beauti .
addid ha manag to wrap up and you know , put in a veri compact packag both the expect and the varianc of these partial sum .
the densiti of the partial sum is a much more complex affair , no matter .
the expect and a varianc leverag addit and record these beauti compact express .
now , thi stori is alreadi tell us a littl bit more .
the expect of sn is n time mu .
or anoth wai of sai thi is , the expect of sn divid by n is mu .
and our experi with the binomi suggest , therefor , that we might anticip that sn divid by n concentr near mu is a good estim of mu , and inde it doe .
and thi is go to be the content of the law of larg number .
we ar now equip to deal with the law of larg number in a fair amount of gener .
we begin with what the inequ of chebyshev sai in the case of a sum of independ variabl .
so let's take stock .
chebyshev's inequ sai that for a gener chanc variabl x , the probabl that the absolut deviat of x from it expect valu , exceed ani given number tau is bound about by the ratio of the varianc of x to tau squar .
now bear in mind that thi is true for ani chanc variabl x .
in particular , what if we replac x by sn ?
then all we'll have to do in chebyshev's inequ is strike out some real refer to x and replac them all by s of n and we've got now a version of the inequ for a partial sum of independ copi of x .
now let's focu on thi .
thi sai someth about the probabl of the absolut deviat of sn from it expect valu .
and here is where addit come in , triumphantli .
so let's take stock of what the kei issu ar .
so to begin , we ar start with repeat independ trial .
a chanc variabl , x , with expect mu , with area sigma squar .
and x1 , x2 , x3 , and so forth ar independ copi of x .
we form partial sum , sn be the enif of these sum be the sum of the first n coordin variabl .
at the moment we have a sum , addit come into plai .
to begin expect is addit without qualif and therefor the expect of sn is just n time mu .
and sinc the summon ar independ , varianc also is addit and so the varianc of sn is n time sigma squar .
it is import to keep in mind that the varianc keynot and expect squar spread around the center .
the actual spread therefor is captur by the squar root of the varianc or the standard deviat .
and so , what can we sai about the standard deviat of sn ?
it is exactli the squar root of n time sigma .
now , observ that both the expect and the standard deviat increas unboundedli as n increas .
but it is import here to keep an idea on the proper scale .
the expect increas linearli with n .
the standard deviat , or spread around the expect valu , increas onli as a squar root of n .
and thi ha got veri import consequ .
consid , for instanc , when n is <num> , the expect of , of s<num> is <num> time the expect of on variabl .
but the varianc of s100 is also <num> time the varianc , the standard deviat is onli squar root of <num> time the standard deviat , or ten time sigma .
so the expect valu is move by <num> , but the spread ha onli increas ten fold .
what if area is <num> , <num> ?
though the expect valu is move <num> , <num> step , the spread ha onli increas a hundredfold .
and thi suggest that we're get an increas concentr right around the center .
the spread around the center is increas much slower than the rate of movement of expect .
so let's focu on thi and now immedi go right , try to write it down , a probabl for a deviat from a mean .
rememb , our estim for the mean , the expect is sn over n .
and what we'd like to know is , what ar the chanc that sn over n deviat in absolut valu from mu by even a tini amount epsilon ?
now the first thing we should do is simplifi the fraction by clear the denomin , multipli throughout by n .
and the event that sn over n minu mu in absolut valu exce epsilon is exactli the same as the event that sn minu n mu in absolut valu exce n time epsilon .
now focu on the right hand side .
the term n time mu is exactli the expect of sn by addit .
and we mai identifi that n epsilon with the deviat paramet tau in chebyshev's inequ .
and so , we just write down the answer .
thi is bound about by chebyshev's inequ , by the ratio of the varianc of sn , <num> tau squar but tau is n time epsilon so we get n epsilon the whole squar .
addit of varianc becaus the sum amount ar independ sai the numer is n time sigma squar and we find that there is a factor n in common and numer denomin cancel that .
and we've got an eleg and simpl express .
let's focu on thi inequ .
it is difficult to ask for someth much simpler and compact than thi .
the probabl that an absolut valu sn over n deviat from mu but as small in amount as epsilon or more is bound about by sigma squar divid by n epsilon squar .
now sigma squar is a varianc of the underli chanc experi .
epsilon squar is your fix error paramet squar .
these ar fix constant in our applic .
rememb we're look at a whole sequenc of partial sum .
what happen to the right hand side as n becom larger and larger and larger ?
well , eventu the right hand side tend to zero .
and thi is content of the weak law of larg number .
so we start with a sequenc of independ repeat trial , where each trial ha got an expect mu , variant sequenc squar .
epsilon is your tini , fix deviat paramet , your allow error toler .
we form partial sum , and the weak law of larg number sai that these partial sum ar increasingli concentr at mu in the follow sens .
at sn over n , deviat from mu by even a tini amount , where the probabl then goe to <num> as n becom larger and larger .
and of cours we should conclud thi with a nice littl slogan , a pithi slogan , which captur the essenc of thi mathemat precis statement .
and here it is .
the probabl that sn over n deviat from it expect valu mu by even a tini amount is small provid onli that a sampl size , n , is larg enough .
or anoth wai of sai thi is in a probabilist sens , sn divid by n is a good estim of mu .
doe that look familiar ?
of cours it doe right ?
thi is exactli the passag we went through when you tri to defend why sampl mean were good estim of popul proport in a pool but now of cours we have it much more gener .
now that we have seen the law of larg number in plai in a continu set , it is now time to test our understand .
now we saw how the law of larg number emerg by follow the analysi for the binomi distribut .
and it should not at all come as a surpris to you to .
come to the realiz that the law of larg number is go to work whether the set is discret or is continu .
so , here is a problem for you to try .
start now with variabl which ar intrins arithmet , in other word , thei take integ valu onli .
we're go to look at repeat independ trial .
and now the continuum is replac by a discret set of possibl , the integ .
suppos now that these variabl have a common expect , mu , and a varianc sigma squar .
your task is to follow along with the analysi we have alreadi accomplish for the continu set .
and recreat a law of larg number in the arithmet set .
so what will you need ?
well , first off , densiti ar go to give wai to mass function .
instead of have a mass densiti spread across a continuum .
we now have probabl mass attach to each integ .
so let's sai we've got a mass function in our usual notat , p of k , denot the probabl that a gener chanc outcom x take the integ valu k .
k , of cours , run through all possibl integ .
the idea of expect now .
will have to becom a weight sum , and natur enough , the integr , in the continuum , segu into a sum in the discret domain .
and of cours we've got to look at a weight sum of valu .
thi is the natur gener of the idea of an arithmet averag .
valu weight accord to chanc .
and final , we're go to need an idea of an expect squar deviat from the mean .
in other word , the varianc .
and the varianc again will have a veri similar express with a natur replac of integr by sum , densiti , by mass function .
so .
have at it .
and when you're done , let's conclud with a sliver .
now , what you discov realli is that we have a law of larg number in the continu set and in the discret set .
and so , here's a slogan .
the law of larg number is go to come into plai .
ani time we have repeat independ trial , and we form a sum of these variabl , these variabl should have a common expect and a common varianc .
and in gener set , we will take the idea of center of mass , and the idea of , of a moment of inertia , and extend it with suitabl linear oper .
and so , at the higher level , the stori is , when or where we have an expect and a varianc , and we have repeat , independ trial .
we're go to expect to see a law of larg number emerg .
the law of larg number is perhap the most intuit of the fundament limit law in the theori of chanc .
and part of the reason for it appeal and for it intuit is becaus it is a law that we ar most familiar with in exampl .
applic where the law of larg number is at work ar rife around us .
so let's take stock of a few of the common exampl .
we begin by consid a game , the basic set .
and thi time let me borrow from the terminolog of statist .
we start with a random sampl x1 through xn .
what thi mean is that we have repeat independ trial with the variabl all conform to a common underli distribut with some common underli expect , sai mu , and , sai , some common underli varianc , sai , sigma squar .
we promptli form the partial sum x1 plu x2 through xn , what we call s sub n , of the sequenc .
at it heart , the law of larg number sai someth about the ratio of sn to n .
now , the moment we divid the sum by n , what we're do is form an arithmet averag of the variabl x1 through xn .
in ordinari languag , we ar look at the mean of that sequenc .
and sinc that sequenc connot a random sampl , we call sn over n a sampl mean .
at it heart , the law of larg number sai someth about the deviat of a sampl mean from it expect valu mu .
the probabl of even a small deviat from mu goe to zero as n becom larg .
but it is alwai us , when we have a clear statement like thi , to re translat thi in ordinari languag , becaus , of cours , it add a littl color to the pictur , and make it a littl more vivid .
what the weak law is sai , in essenc , is that if the sampl size n becom suitabl larg , then the sampl mean is approxim equal to the true expect or mean valu , mu .
what thi pictur tell us is that the weak law give us a principl estim of mu when it is unknown .
the sampl mean is approxim the expect mu .
and if it is unknown , we now have a principl process for estim it .
gener a random sampl accord to the underli chanc experi , form the sampl mean , and that should be approxim mu .
with a certain error and , of cours , with a certain confid .
if thi sound familiar , it is becaus it is .
thi is exactli the set we saw when we estim popul paramet from poll , right ?
so what the weak law is do is give us a statist estim of a mean valu , poll be our prototyp exampl .
in thi case , the underli chanc experi is a bernoulli trial .
you pick a member of a popul .
and your x's ar on and zero .
what is expect that is unknown , it's the popul paramet p , the subpopul of the popul in , sai , categori on .
and the sampl mean give us a good estim of it , as we've seen .
other exampl , right .
a new car ha come out , and it promis a certain mileag , let's sai an electr car , and you get a certain mileag befor a recharg is need .
of cours , when on purchas the car and on drive it , the mileag on get depend a great deal upon all kind of extern circumst , the natur of the driver , the qualiti of the driver , the traffic circumst , mayb the weather , mayb the ag of the car .
all of these ar paramet which will affect the actual mileag on get in ani given run .
in other word , the mileag on get is a chanc variabl .
well , what is it , on averag ?
what is the expect ?
well , thi is a priori unknown .
how doe the car compani give us such an estim ?
well , the weak law tell us how thei might go about do it .
gener a random sampl of run , take the sampl mean and that should give us a good estim of an underli expect .
thi kind of set can be appli to all kind of consum properti that on is interest in .
anoth exampl is thing like calcul of lifetim .
if on goe and purchas , let's sai , an electr bulb , it will typic come with some kind of statement sai that it life expect is so mani hour of continu us .
how doe on get such a life expect ?
of cours , the usag depend , again , on mani factor .
environment factor , humid , whether the current is fluctuat , and so on .
plu of cours , natur variabl in the filament and so on insid the bulb .
in other word , the lifetim of the bulb is a chanc variabl .
how doe on estim it lifetim ?
form a random sampl by take mani bulb and take the sampl mean and averag out the lifetim .
and bob's your uncl .
the same kind of time to failur is appli to thing of more portent .
for exampl , how long doe an aeroplan have in it oper lifetim ?
in other word , how long befor metal fatigu develop and the airplan is in danger of crash .
and again , on in principl doe exhaust test of metal fatigu , form independ sampl , form a sampl mean , and again , we have an estim .
likewis , the time to failur of a bridg , of a pylon , of a road or a build or anyth whatev , what have you .
all right , still other exampl .
how doe on form actuari tabl of risk ?
for exampl , the life expect of individu .
and again , thi is a chanc driven process .
if on form a sampl mean , we get an accur estim of the underli life expect , expect , provid of cours a sampl is larg enough .
the law of larg number also give a firm foundat for the theori of fair game .
and the prototyp exampl here is gambl .
right .
imagin on goe to a casino .
and on want to plai repeatedli in some game of chanc .
on pai a fee to partak of the game .
and when on plai the game , then on win or lose a certain amount of monei .
the expect loss or gain is govern by a paramet , mu .
now , what should the casino charg for you to plai the game if it is known that the expect win ar mu ?
natur enough , we'd sai that the charg for a fair game should be mu per trial .
if our expect win is mu , then you should be charg mu so that your net expect gain is zero .
and that would be a fair game .
it's not bias or skew in on direct or the other .
the weak law give us a firm foundat for belief that thi actual is a principl and good strategi .
on should be a littl cautiou in how on interpret the weak law in the set , all right ?
it is sai formal a veri precis mathemat statement , that the probabl that in absolut valu , the sampl mean deviat from mu by more than a tini epsilon is small .
it doe not sai that you ar guarante to not win or not lose .
now , the devil in here is in the detail , right ?
and it is true that we've hit thi with a fairli blunt hammer in that we normal it by the factor n .
and over long number of trial , lot of detail ar hidden in that larg n .
thi'll take us a littl too far afield , so i shall not get into thi , but it is in principl possibl to construct a fair game where on pai a fair entri fee of mu each time we plai the game , and construct in such a wai that on is essenti guarante to lose lot of monei , all right ?
so on should alwai take a mathemat pronounc with some caution .
rememb , the mathemat , the terminolog , the definit , and the result , when appli to the real world , ar model of the real world .
to the extent the model captur the essenti featur of the phenomenon in consider , we will get accur and good result .
to the extent that the definit miss a kei featur , to that extent , then the applic becom suspect .
i will leav it to the student to think of other applic of the weak law of larg number .
the next time she open a newspap or listen to a new report , and she see a number thrown out , perhap she might be tempt to ask , oh , i see .
here's where the weak law come in .
and thi will be a us and instruct wai of think about the weak law as you go forward .
our next applic of the law of larg number is go to take you back , wai back to elementari calculu , and i'm go to articul for you a simpl littl problem that you have assuredli seen befor , but thi problem is go to have a littl kick in the tail .
and thi particular kick in the tale is go to come from statist physic in the immedi aftermath of the second world war .
so , without further ado , here is a problem in integr .
the set ?
suppos we ar given a function f in on or more variabl for definit .
think of it as a function of on variabl f of x .
and let's sai thi function is defin on the unit interv .
to make sure thing ar well behav , let's suppos the function is bound in absolut valu .
in other word , the absolut valu of f is no more than <num> everywher .
and our problem , our object , is to evalu the integr of that function .
a pictur as alwai , is worth <num> , <num> word , so let me draw a gener function for you in on dimens .
so , let's think of a function , f of x , defin on the unit interv as i've sketch for you .
our object is to evalu j , the integr of that function over the interv .
and of cours you rememb from your basic calculu class that thi just stand for the area under the curv of the function .
now we've seen in our basic calculu sever exampl of integr when the function ar well behav .
we know how to integr trigonometr function , exponenti function , logarithm and so on .
but of cours if on is given a gener function f , then on doesn't realli have , in principl , a , an explicit close form answer for what the area under the curv is .
and so then we ar now in the domain of numer integr .
how doe on proce to go ahead and numer .
estim the area under the curv of a gener function .
now what i'm go to give you in principl is a descript of a function f .
and what you will be abl to do in principl is , given ani valu x for the argument .
you will be abl to look up or comput the valu of the function f of x at that point .
so , thi is the inform given to us .
the abil to construct or comput the valu of the function at ani desir point .
our object is to determin an estim for the area under the curv , the integr of that function .
natur enough for a numer integr , we start by sampl the function at given point .
and the simplest such idea might be to sampl the function at three regular point .
let's sai at x equal to <num> , at x equal to on half , and at x equal to <num> .
now we have three valu for the function that we're go to read out through our lookup tabl .
so thi is go to cost us three lookup of the tabl .
we now know the valu f of <num> , f of on half , f of <num> .
how do we combin them ?
well we're simpli go to add them up with suitabl weight factor .
now , what ar the right weight factor ?
well , it depend upon the particular approxim strategi that you us .
you might , for exampl , have been expos to someth call a trapezoid rule .
the particular approxim i've shown you is call simpson's rule .
we won't deriv it here , but .
it is occas by try to fit a parabola around the function point , and then figur out what the area of the parabola should be .
and that will give you an approxim for the area under the curv of the target function .
of cours thi is a veri crude approxim .
we just look at three valu of the function and ad them up suitabl .
of cours , simpson's rule tell us how to go about thi more gener by sampl the function more frequent , at more and more point .
and of cours , the more you sampl the function , the better the approxim .
that might well be satisfi , but a veri crude approxim .
let's just take these three valu , add them up accord to simpson's rule , and bob's your uncl , here is your estim for the function , admittedli crude .
now , with thi as background , now let's see what happen when we have more than on variabl for the function .
so , we want to look at how thi problem scale with dimension .
of cours we could think of two dimens , three dimens and so on , and we'll immedi jump to an abstract set .
let's sai we ar given a function f of d variabl .
d , of cours , stand for dimension .
we ar go to call the variabl , natur , x <num> , x <num> , x <num> through x sub d .
let's sai the function is suitabl well behav .
in absolut valu it is bound by <num> everywher .
and so what we ar interest in is the integr of thi function as each of the variabl vari in the unit integr .
and we're go to call thi j .
our object is to estim j .
again , if f is well behav , it's veri regular , then we might hope to actual explicitli iter evalu thi integr .
but in gener , for a gener function , that is hopeless , and we ar back to numer comput .
well let's see what simpson's rule sai in a d dimension set .
let's start with our lesson from on dimens .
in on dimens , we just sampl the variabl at three point , <num> , on half and <num> .
what will you do if you have two variabl , x <num> and x <num> ?
well , natur , we'll want to sampl the function with our first variabl rang across three valu , <num> , on half , and <num> , and the second variabl rang across three valu , <num> , on half , and <num> .
and so , we'll end up sampl the function at , on a three by three grid in the unit squar .
and that's where the function is defin .
excel .
how do we do it for three dimens ?
well , no problem .
we're now go to look at x <num> rang with three valu , x <num> rang over three valu , x <num> rang with three valu .
in other word , we want .
to look at a function defin insid the unit cube , we're go to sampl the valu of a function at regularli space lattic point .
three per dimens .
and onc you evalu the function , we're just go to add up these valu suitabl weight .
okai and if you do all of thi , you're go to get , oh , well thi is a horribl express isn't it ?
and messi look express .
but it is not too unintellig becaus if you look at what it is sai , what we ar go to do is the follow .
let each coordin variabl rang over three valu , <num> , on half and <num> .
for each select of the coordin variabl , evalu the valu of the function at a lattic point .
now you've got a whole bunch of lattic point at which you've evalu the function .
weight them properli , and simpson's rule or the trapezoid rule , or whatev you want to us will tell you what the proper weight should be .
these weight , well , of cours , depend upon the lattic point .
you saw , for exampl , in on dimens , the weight were on sixth at <num> , four sixth at on half and on sixth at <num> .
similarli , you're go to get differ weight at each of the lattic point at which you're go to evalu the function .
call these weight a .
and identifi the lattic point of the subscript , x1 , x <num> through x d at which you've evalu that function .
weight the function , scale by their weight and add up over the lattic point .
and bob's your uncl , thi is it .
and , of cours , on doesn't want to do thi by hand in more than on or two dimens .
and of , but of cours it's easi enough to put into a comput todai .
and veri quickli churn out a sum and out come an answer , which is a crude approxim to the desir integr .
now , my object here is to take a look at how the demand on a comput .
ar scale as the variabl increas from on , two , three , and so on .
so , i'd want to take a look at the dimension , d , of the problem .
and how mani comput i have to do in thi simpl approxim via simpson's rule .
well , it's easi enough , let's start with the simplest case , where we have on dimens .
d is equal to on .
and as we saw , we need three lookup .
so let's identifi a comput with a lookup of the valu of the function .
okai ?
of cours there ar also go to be thing like addit .
but i'm go to have a similar number of addit .
and so forth .
so .
in on dimens , for the crudest approxim for the area under the curv , i'm go to need to evalu the function at three point , three comput .
what happen in two dimens ?
well in two dimens i've got now a squar and grid point , three per dimens .
in other word , i have <num> time <num> or <num> place in the unit squar where i have to evalu the target function .
in three dimens , again , in each dimens i have to have three point .
<num> time <num> time <num> give me <num> lattic point insid the three dimension cube .
and now we begin to see a pattern .
how doe it work in d dimens ?
in each dimens , we want to evalu the coordin at three possibl so there ar <num> time <num> time <num> and so forth .
number of possibl or <num> to the power d lattic point and therefor we need <num> to the power d .
evalu of the function in d dimens .
so far so good .
it seem veri reason , veri elementari and of cours it is a veri simpl thing to program into a modern comput if on so desir .
now , just to get a feel for the scale , numer .
let's see what , what happen if we ar deal with , at a whim , sai , d is equal to <num> dimens .
if d is <num> then we're deal with , <num> to the power <num> lookup of the valu of the function .
now what is <num> to the power <num> .
now if you translat it , it come out to be a littl bit more than <num> to the power <num> .
paus for a moment to absorb thi .
thi is a mind bogglingli larg number .
to put thi in context .
some estim of the number of atom in the known univers put the number of these particl at about <num> to the power <num> .
eh , suppos you imagin that there ar <num> to the power <num> atom in the univers .
suppos somehow we could cajol each individu atom to do a function evalu for you .
and let's sai each atom doe on billion function evalu for you everi second .
and each of <num> of the power <num> atom of the univers do on million evalu for you .
and you put them all to work at the same time .
even so .
the number of evalu you need , <num> to the power <num> , even work at thi rate will requir more time than the entir univers ha exist up til point .
the moral of the stori is that .
when the dimension grow , even the simplest comput to try to evalu that integr .
it seem so simpl , so trite , so benign .
but even the simplest comput is effect imposs .
even veri crude , veri approxim .
it is imposs not becaus i sai so , or it is imposs not becaus we have not been clever enough in try to find sum .
it is imposs becaus the univers doe not have enough resourc to be abl to comput thi problem in a reason amount of time .
now , thi is .
a littl disquiet .
and you see the numer integr we're do wa so elementari , so simpl .
which is ad up valu of the function at a few place , appar .
but , the few place blow up , even in a modest number of dimens , sai <num> dimens .
at thi point a student might well feel , oh well okai , so that's a bit weird .
but .
what do i care ?
well , problem like these aris natur in statist physic .
immedi after the second world war , it becam clear that physic understand of the univers , especi an atom understand , wa go to becom the kei enterpris in the middl to latter part of the 20th centuri .
and there's perhap no other domain of in scienc or mathemat , where integr in veri larg number of dimens crop up so readili as in statist physic .
and so , it beco , it becam imper .
for peopl to try to estim integr like these in larg dimens .
now , the fact that it appear to be physic imposs to find even approxim through the desir integr , doesn't mean that the problem ha gone awai .
we still have an integr left to evalu .
the question then is , what can on do , if anyth ?
now , thi wa a set , as i point out , immedi after the second world war .
and a consortium of three individu , enrico fermi , the note physicist , john von neumann .
the mathematician at the institut for advanc studi in princeton , and yet anoth mathematician , got togeth and came up with a bewild idea , a truli bewild idea .
the idea wa to try to estim thi integr j via a chanc driven comput .
sai that again ?
a chanc driven comput ?
what doe that mean ?
i mean , isn't a comput someth veri precis ?
<num> plu <num> is alwai inevit <num> .
where is that chanc in thi game ?
oh , bear with me .
thi is the next part of our stori .
so , we ar face with a problem origin from statist physic of evalu an integr in a larg number of dimens , where , appar , the problem is physic intract .
now , let's remind ourselv of what the set is .
so , to begin , we ar given a function .
a function is in on or more dimens .
so , we're think of a function in , let's sai , on the unit interv , on the unit squar , the unit cube in three dimens or more gener , a unit cube in d dimens .
and , for regularitii's sake , let's sai , the function bound in absolut valu , the precis size of the function , the valu of the bound , doe not matter .
we'll keep thing simpl and sai the function is bound by a unit valu .
our object is to evalu the integr of the function , over it domain .
in other word , over the d dimension cube .
a smidgen of vector notat .
we'll simplifi our express and allow everyth to be put togeth in bite size piec .
so , let's restat the problem in vector notat .
so , the idea again , we're given a function , let's sai in d dimens .
with variabl x1 through xd , each of these variabl take valu in the unit interv .
to get there , then , the collect of d variabl take valu in what we call the d dimension unit cube .
and the usual notat for thi is , the unit , unit interv with a superscript d indic that we have d variabl .
okai .
so , we ar given a function on the d dimension unit cube .
and , the function is bound in absolut valu by , by unit .
what do we need ?
we want to evalu an integr .
and , we will compact the notat of the integr us thi vector notat .
by sai , i want to integr , iter , over the d variabl in the unit cube .
the function f of a bold face x which repres the d variabl x1 through xd .
d of bold face x repres d of x sub d , dot dot dot through d of x1 .
you see here , just a compact wai of write the same integr which you saw on the previou slide .
our object is to evalu thi and we've seen that , numer , thi is go to be veri difficult .
the idea that wa propos by fermi for norman and ulam , wa to try a chanc driven comput .
take a gambl , thei said .
what doe that mean ?
so , suppos we start by pick up a collect of d variabl , by sampl at random from the d dimension cube .
what doe thi mean ?
to put an imag firmli in your mind , imagin that you have a three dimension cube , you have three variabl .
you're go to pick a point insid the cube .
eeni , meeni , mini , moe at random , and out come a valu .
of cours , you want to do thi in a uniform wai over the whole cube , so that , no area is unfairli repres over the other .
in other word , we have random sampl accord to a uniform distribut .
what doe thi mean ?
it mean that , each individu variabl x1 , x2 , through x sub d ar select by independ sampl .
thei constitut repeat independ trial from a common uniform densiti on the unit interv .
now , thi is a set we well understand .
so , if we have repeat independ trial , then , the probabl law govern the ensembl of the collect is given by a rule of product .
you'll recal at the discret domain , probabl multipli .
in the continu domain , densiti multipli .
and so , accordingli , what thi mean formerli in notat is that , thi vector of d variabl , boldfac x is govern by a joint densiti p of boldfac x and we obtain p as a product measur by multipli out the individu densiti .
recal that , we had introduc a uniform densiti , u of x , a function which take valu <num> in the unit interv and <num> outsid it .
each of our variabl is govern by that self same densiti .
and so , to , to obtain p of x1 through xd , we simpli multipli out the uniform densiti evalu at x1 time the uniform densiti evalu at x2 and so on .
now , of cours , sinc the uniform densiti take valu <num> onli in the unit interv , thi product will be <num> , precis when all the variabl , individu ar the unit interv .
in other word , thi product is go to be <num> exactli insid the unit cube and <num> outsid it .
so , thi is the uniform densiti in d dimens .
now , we've got thi random point by random select .
so , we understand how we can do thi in principl .
all we have to do is gener d independ uniform variant and stick togeth a point in d dimens .
that seem rel , rel simpl even in <num> dimens .
that's not a hard problem at all .
onc you've done that , you've got a random point in the cube .
what do we do next ?
well , look up the valu of the function that is given to us at that randomli select point .
natur enough , we want to call the valu of the function at that random point , let's call that y .
okai , so , y is f of x ?
now , the differ here from the normal set is that , thi is y evalu at a random point x .
in other word , y itself is a chanc variabl .
okai .
so , mayb we should comput thing about y .
what can we sai about y ?
so , pick a random point x , evalu the function at that point x .
that's on look up in our look up tabl , on comput .
thi is now a new chanc variabl , y is equal to f of x .
on of the question we could ask is , well , what is it expect ?
what is e of y or what is the same thing ?
the expect of f at a random point x .
now , the chang of variabl theorem immedi ride to our rescu .
now , how ar we go to do thi ?
pick ani gener point littl x insid the d dimension cube .
evalu the valu of the function at a littl point , f of littl x .
weight thi valu for the function accord to the mass that is place by p near littl x .
integr out of all possibl as x sweep over the d dimension cube .
and .
there you go .
thi is an express for the expect of f at a random point x .
student might well object at thi point that , well , thi is all well and good .
but you've given me anoth d dimension integr and you alreadi told me that it , comput a d dimension integr is go to be hopeless .
so , where do we go from here ?
well , i'm not actual go to evalu thi integr , but i do want to analyz it and see where it lead us .
so , to begin , in principl , in an integr , like what you see on the right , the variabl x1 through xd , which compris the vector boldfac x rang over all possibl in the d dimension space .
but , of cours , in practic , where thei can rang is constrain by the densiti function , p of x .
recal p of x , is <num> insid the unit cube and <num> outsid .
so , thi big integr collaps into just an integr over the unit cube .
there's no contribut from outsid the unit cube .
and insid the unit cube , p of x is ident <num> , and so , thi integr collaps to a slightli simpler look integr , still formid but simpler .
paus for a moment and take a look at that express on the right .
do you recogn it ?
of cours , you do .
thi is precis the valu j for the integr of the function over the unit cube .
thi is what we want .
oh , thi is brilliant .
understand what we have done here .
we select a point at random , we will evalu the function valu at that point , but that's a chanc variabl .
the expect of the chanc variabl is exactli the thing we want to comput , j .
but , you know ?
it's not go to be veri satisfactori to just pick out on point and sai , oh , evalu the function here .
thi is your answer .
why ?
becaus , ye , on averag , the answer's go to give you a valu of j .
but , it's go to get scatter all over the place .
and so , natur , we want to ask how much is that scatter ?
how wide spread out around j is it ?
so , natur enough , we want to take a look at the varianc of the valu of the function at a random point .
we'll have recours to the chang of variabl theorem again .
pick a point , littl bold face x , insid the unit interv , ani point .
evalu the function at that point .
that's f of x .
ask , how far is f of x from the expect we have just comput , which is that fix but unknown j .
in other word , look at f of x minu j and natur enough , sinc i don't care whether it's , you're on the right or left of j , we're go to look at the squar of thi .
and so , we're look at the x , the squar to deviat of f , at a given point x from j .
we'll rate it in a consular mass that x put near that point .
integr out of all possibl , and now we've got a varianc .
now , we're go to simplifi thi quickli , and i'm go to be greedi and i'm go to be satisfi with veri crude approxim .
but , to begin , thi is a process we've seen befor , right ?
to try to simplifi it , we'll take a look at the integr .
and , insid the integr , we find that there's a whole squar in squar bracket .
someth like an express of the form a minu b the whole squar .
where a is identifi with f of x , b with j .
well , we know from elementari school that a minu b the whole squar is inevit a squar minu two a b plu b squar .
and so , we write those down .
but , moment we write that down , we realiz that i can comput the integr by ad up three contribut .
on from the a squar term , on from the minu <num> ab term , and on from the b squar term .
all right , let's write thi down .
so , the a squar term contribut an integr of the form f of x squar .
the 2ab term contribut well , sinc 2ab is identifi with <num> time f of x time j , and <num> j is a constant , it come out of the integr .
and so , i've got <num> j time an integr of f .
and final , the last term b squar will correspond to a j squar , well that's a constant .
fix but unknown , yup .
but that constant come out of the integr as well and that's our third set up .
we can simplifi thi quickli .
it look like we're make thing wors here by expand an integr into bigger and bigger and bigger and messier thing .
but , bare with me .
take a good , hard look at the integr in the second tab on the right .
what do you sai ?
doe that remind you of anyth ?
it should .
it's exactli the express for j that we wrote in the previou line .
so , the entir integr in the middl is exactli the quantiti we want to estim j .
what about the third term on the right ?
we're integr a densiti over the entir rang , and densiti ar properli normal to unit .
and , therefor , the integr must be <num> .
or , if you want , you can identifi that p of x is <num> onli insid the unit cube .
so , we ar integr d of x insid the unit cube .
we ar look at the volum of the unit cube which is inevit <num> .
so , the third term becom <num> .
now , we see what happen .
the middl term contribut minu 2j time j or minu 2j squar .
the third term contribut plu j squar .
cancel 1j squar and now , we've got a slightli simpler express .
and , integr of f of x the whole squar , weight accord to p of x from which you subtract j squar .
a littl hous clean yellow make thing even simpler .
j squar is a posit quantiti , whatev it is .
and i'm take awai a posit quantiti on the right .
if i expurg , elimin the term j squar , i can onli increas the valu of the term on the right .
and so , i've now got an inequ , the varianc of x is no more .
that the integr of the squar of f of x weight accord to p of x .
all right , have made on approxim , let's go ahead and make on more and simplifi life even further .
what do we know about f of x ?
well , we know it's bound and we presum it's bound by unit .
therefor , in absolut valu f of x is no more than <num> .
and , therefor , the squar of f of x is also manifest lead no more than <num> .
f of x the hold squar is less than or equal to <num> .
if , in the integr , i replac f of x squar by <num> , i can onli increas the size of the integr .
and so , i got thi is no more than the integr of just p of x dx .
and what is that ?
well , i'm integr a densiti and , therefor , by normal , it must inevit again be a unit .
what's the moral here ?
if i select a random point in a d dimension cube and evalu the function at that point , i get a chanc driven variabl .
but that variabl ha expect exactli j , the quantiti that i want to determin .
and , the expect squar spread , the varianc of that estim , is no more than unit .
okai , thi set the stage for a beauti and eleg resolut of our problem .
and , thi will come up next .
so , we ar now come to it .
the bewild idea of a chanc driven comput .
thi idea ha fuel a cottag industri of method , chanc base , which percol through the landscap .
and we have the catch all phrase , tthe mont carlo method to captur thi ensembl of idea .
but , we're jump ahead of , of ourselv .
let's come back and summar our kei discoveri so far .
the problem ?
we ar given a bound function of d variabl , let us sai , on the unit cube .
and let's sai the function wa bound , an absolut valu by <num> .
we wish to comput it integr , a number fix , but unknown at thi point that we ar go to call j .
so we want to comput or estim j .
our process is go to involv a random select of a point in the d dimension cube and an evalu of the function at that point .
of cours , thi give us a chanc driven evalu of the function .
no matter .
so , what have we discov ?
that the expect valu of the function evalu at a random point is precis the paramet j that we ar seek .
and that the expect squar spread of the function valu around it center , the varianc is bound by unit .
we're immedi now led to the idea of gener a random sampl by independ select from the unit cube of d dimens .
in other word , i give a sequenc of point .
now notic the virtu of vector notat .
each boldfac uppercas x , repres a collect of d variabl .
but i'm go to do thi experi n time independ so we have repeat independ trial .
each of these vector is a uniqu trial in it own right , we need to identifi which trial .
so let's us now superscript becaus subscript ar get overload .
so our superscript <num> indic the first trial .
a superscript <num> indic a second trial .
and a superscript n indic the nth trial .
i'm go to think about n as a modest number .
thousand , ten of thousand , a million , perhap .
but not much larger and of cours , even a million evalu of a function is not veri much for a modern dai comput .
it can do it in a trice .
so , we ar go to start with a random sampl , x1 through xn with the same underli distribut as a random x chosen from the unit cube .
and what do we do next ?
natur , we evalu the valu of the function .
we look it up at each of these n randomli chosen point .
and let's call the valu that result y1 , y2 , through y sub n .
now , what can we sai about these deriv valu , y1 through yn ?
what do we know about them ?
well each y depend upon a uniqu x .
and the xs ar drawn independ .
and therefor , we immedi conclud that y1 through yn repres a random sampl , a sequenc obtain by repeat independ trial of some experi .
the experi at hand , of cours , reli upon random select of the unit cube , and then evalu the valu of the function at variou point .
moreov , these valu , y1 through yn have a common distribut .
why ?
becaus , of cours , the xe have the same underli uniform distribut of the unit cube .
and therefor , all the ys have expect exactli j .
and all of the ys have varianc no more than unit .
okai , and the moment we've got an independ sampl , like thi , we know immedi that the law of larg number beckon invitingli to us .
so , what is the law of larg number go to sai in thi context ?
well first , we want to form a sum of the valu y .
of cours , these ar just a sum of the valu of the function , which is given to us at fix but random point <num> through n .
okai , so , you pick x1 through xn randomli .
you evalu the function at those point , and add up the valu you get .
that is all it is .
and let's us our old notat again .
let's call it s sub n , an accumul sum of function valu .
but , expect is ad here .
and therefor the expect of the sum is natur just the sum of the individu expect .
but each y ha got a common expect , j .
and therefor the expect of the sum is simpli n time j .
what can we sai about the variant ?
well , the varianc of sn is likewis the sum of the individu varianc becaus we know that y1 through yn ar independ variabl .
each of the varianc is bound by unit and therefor the varianc of sn is no more than n time unit or simpli n .
and as a law of larg number immedi tell us that the sampl mean sn over n is go to be concentr near it expect which is exactli j .
and so now we have a principl estim of j , by the underli sampl mean from thi process .
sn over n should behav like j .
thi procedur at it heart is what we todai call the mont carlo method .
so , where doe the mont carlo method aris from ?
where doe the name aris from ?
well , the stori is probabl but it , it goe that , von neumann , on of the origin of the method , wa amus by the chanc driven context for thi .
he said , we ar go to get out a fix valu , an integr , by essenti , gambl , by a game of chanc .
and the connot of the gambl hous at mont carlo at game of chanc led to him suggest the name mont carlo for the method .
and ever sinc then , we call such method which reli upon comput us random gener of point , we call all of these mont carlo method .
now , thi is all well and good , but natur on of the question that we would ask is , well , we want to evalu a j for some mysteri purpos in physic or somewher els .
and you sai , well , plai thi mysteri game of chanc .
comput sampl mean , divid by n and that's an estim of your underli unknown , j .
how good exactli is thi estim ?
let's take a prompt look at thi .
so our basic question is , how well doe a sampl mean estim the paramet j , the integr that we ar try to estim .
ar thei go to follow the same path as befor ?
first , let us specifi a , an error toler that we ar will to sustain .
sai we ar will to sustain a <num> error , perhap a <num> error , a <num> error , mayb a <num> error .
well , of cours , we don't want to a priori restrict what thei're toler should be .
so we'll inevit call the amount of error in j that we ar will to toler , we'll call it epsilon .
and so , our basic question will be , what is the probabl that a sampl mean sn over n deviat from it expect , the effect for unknown j , an absolut valu by more than epsilon ?
in other word , you ar beyond error toler .
we would like thi chanc to be small .
of cours , we recogn the structur of the analysi .
thi is good for exactli the process by which we analyz poll , by which we deriv the law of larg number .
we begin by clear the denomin .
multipli throughout by n .
and so thi express becom equival to sai thi is the probabl that sn deviat from n time j in absolut valu by more than n time epsilon .
n time j is just the expect of sn .
and now , chebyshev's inequ beckon invitingli to us .
we know that thi probabl is bound about by the varianc of sn divid by the squar of the deviat , the deviat here is n time epsilon .
so the squar of that is n squar epsilon squar .
we have an estim for the varianc .
well , we haven't comput it exactli , but we know that the varianc of sn is bound about by n .
and so the inequ keep grow in the proper direct .
the probabl of a deviat by epsilon or more is no more than n over n squar epsilon squar .
what have we got here .
okai .
what we want , rememb epsilon is the toler to area that we have presuppos .
so we want an area of larger of epsilon with a small probabl .
that is go to be our confid paramet .
so , for exampl , we want , let's sai , an error of no more than <num> with a confid of <num> , which mean that exceed <num> should have all the chanc of no more than <num> .
if the right hand side in the express doe not exce <num> , then , i can guarante a confid of <num> .
of cours , i don't want to prescrib what the confid in your pronounc need to be a priori .
it's go to be dictat by the need of the problem .
all right , so more gener , we're go to presuppos a given error toler epsilon .
we ar allow to make a mistak up to epsilon .
or , if we understand the chanc driven game .
there's a chanc that thi might happen , that we get a larg error more than epsilon .
we'll requir a confid that error is no more than epsilon to , we sai , within <num> minu delta .
delta as a confid paramet .
thi is also given to us ahead of time .
and now , we've got a veri simpl observ .
if the right hand side , <num> over n epsilon squar , doe not exce delta , then immedi we can conclud that a sampl mean is go to estim the fix but mysteri and unknown j .
with an error of no more than epsilon and a confid of at least <num> minu delta .
rewrit our express around the qualiti and we find that the sampl size need to estim j with an error of no more than epsilon and a confid of at least <num> minu delta .
is no more than <num> over epsilon squar time delta .
let's put in some number here to get a feel for what's go on .
suppos we want an error estim which give you a fairli tight toler of , sai , no more than <num> error .
and you want a confid of quit high , sai , <num> .
epsilon is <num> . <num> and delta is also <num> . <num> .
we plug it into our equat .
and we find that n need to be onli a million .
if you sampl a million point at random insid the unit cube , evalu the function at those million point .
add them up and divid by a million .
the law of larg number guarante that your sampl mean estim that unknown integr j with an error of no more than <num> and a confid of <num> .
isn't that remark ?
rememb , when d wa <num> we start with an appar intract problem .
it need <num> to the power of <num> comput for a crude comput us an elementari form of simpson's rule .
now we ar sai forget <num> to the power <num> .
i just need a million comput .
of cours , a million is noth for a modern comput .
you've now appar solv an intract problem .
but there ar some caveat .
let's take stock of what we've done .
some magic appar ha been perform here and let's try to demystifi it .
thi ensembl of idea , as i've told you , is call the mont carlo method becaus of it's chanc driven overton .
and there ar some immedi , obviou posit point for it , some pro for the method .
now what ar the variou pro ?
first , a rel small sampl of point in the cube will give rise to accur estim of the underli integr of a function .
so , a million point give us an error of no more than <num> with a confid of <num> .
but someth remark ha also happen .
nowher in our estim doe the dimension , d , appear .
in fact , the sampl size estim need for our mont carlo sum doe in no wai , depend upon the underlin dimension of the problem .
a million point will give you an estim with a <num> error , so will a million point in <num> dimens .
or a thousand dimens , or a hundr million dimens .
thi is beauti .
and if the listen think back she will sai we saw someth like thi .
thi is exactli what we saw in the context of poll .
of cours , do poll to estim popul sentiment seem , on the surfac , veri differ from comput a numer integr , doe it not ?
but the underli chanc mechan by which we approach the problem is exactli the same , and just as poll don't depend upon the size of underli popul .
so too , the mont carlo method don't care about the underli dimension of the problem .
these ar wonder attribut for an approach to comput , especi in what appear to be a complet intract set .
but , there ar some caveat .
so here ar some con of the method .
first , a method veri quickli give rise to good estim of j , the interv .
but the method falter and break down if the area of toler you need is exceedingli tight .
if you tell me i want an answer with as , which is within on millionth of a part of j , then you're go to need to sampl , someth like ten to the power <num> time .
well the number's get larg now , now we're get to be a signific burden .
and if you want an even tighter toler , thing blow up on us becaus the scale is like on over epsilon squar .
and the smaller epsilon get , the faster that blow up .
so , the method is , is veri good in get you a quick and dirti answer , mayb even better than dirti , a quick and reason accur answer , that is go to break if you demand exceedingli tight precis .
again you might be remind of the same kind of phenomenon we encount in poll .
if you're look at poll and we're look at a polit set and we want to try to separ two candid .
if thei ar veri close to each other , poll start break down .
and thi is exactli the same phenomenon .
now the listen might have anoth object .
now she might sai , like , look , thi is okai , but if you're go to tell me i can't get to , smaller than <num> to her without thing break on me , but i need more , i need better posit .
what can i do ?
well the short answer to that is , you know , life happen , okai ?
we can't alwai get everyth we want .
but let me borrow or paraphras a , a bromid of t . w .
kearn from oxford who point out that in ani case , a principl and reason answer in a small number of step is to be prefer to no answer at all and an infinit number of step .
with a million step , i get an answer with an error of no more than <num> and a confid of <num> .
that's sure better than no answer at all in try to comput a sum over ten to the power <num> term .
that's hopeless , right ?
so , here's a practic reason why , thi is , at least give us a wai forward and give us princip answer .
there is anoth corner howev , and that is thi comput method is intrins chanc driven .
if i do a mont carlo comput todai , i sampl a million point , add them up , divid by a million and sai here's your answer .
and if i do thi comput tomorrow , i'm go to get differ answer .
thi is troubl .
someth deep and fundament ha chang .
and to put thi in context , you know , bear in mind that comput through the middl part of the 20th centuri histor meant two thing .
when we comput , we comput precis and we comput certainli .
comput connot precis and certainti .
two plu two wa alwai four and will alwai remain four .
now , thi wa the idea of comput from pre histori all the wai through the middl of the 20th centuri .
with the advent of these probabilist method , philosoph , someth fundament had chang .
comput us these method now connot both approxim .
we ar give up get exact answer .
and it connot also a lack of certainti .
it's not onli that i'm get an approxim answer , in fact ani numer integr is go to give you an approxim answer .
but , even wors , there's a possibl that my answer is complet and total and irretriev wrong .
but we take some comfort in the follow understand .
if a hundr peopl do thi mont carlo simul , on averag , <num> of them ar go to get good answer within <num> of the true answer .
on of them , sadli , on averag , is go to be out in left field .
and veri sadli , he won't know that hi answer is wrong .
there's no wai of know a priori that your sampl wa aberr .
but that's life in the 20th and 21st centuri , right ?
follow kearn's bromid onc more , keep in mind that in ani case a principl answer in a small number of step , with some probabilist guarante , is alwai better than no answer at all in an infinit number of step .
follow it discoveri , in the 1950s , the mont carlo method ha taken over the comput landscap .
now , it a common garden tool in the hand of profession , scientist , in all kind of area .
climat chang engin us it to do climat model .
so the engin of all stripe in fluid mechan , in electro magnet .
physicist us it .
chemist us it .
biologist us it .
mathematician us it .
sociologist us it .
an auditor who ha to check the transact of a larg compani over the cours of a year face a larg number of file of transact .
how doe he handl a veri larg number in a short period of time ?
he sampl randomli .
again we ar us mont carlo method .
these tool now ar embed in all our common comput devic , in our mobil phone , in our comput , over the internet .
the mont carlo method ha becom ubiquit .
at it's heart , all we're do is the same phenomenon that we ar appeal to , that work repos .
the engin fuel the mont carlo method is thi wonder , magic law of larg number .
now , i could go on to give you more beguil exampl , but we shouldn't be greedi .
so we ar go to stop with our applic at thi point , conclud thi segment and we'll come back when we finish up with all the requir lectur with some option dessert item where you'll see some more hopefulli intrigu beauti exampl .
so where do we go from here ?
the latin phrase quo vadi ask a question , where ar you go ?
as is frequent the case in mathemat , in scienc , in engin , when a first discoveri ha been made , howev humbl , it can set in motion a process of discoveri which unearth subtl deep consequ .
and so it wa with chebyshev's wonder inequ in <num> .
the inequ lead to the law of larg number .
now a natur question then , which preoccupi thinker and research wa where els can we appli it ?
how can we gener thi epiphani of chebyshev ?
so let's begin again , what is a set we have repeat independ trial of variabl which come from some common distribut and thei have a common expect that is , sai , mu .
there wa also a requir that the variabl had a common varianc , sai sigma squar .
but it is a sad fact , but true , that a varieti of chebyshev's experi in the physic world can be model by variabl whose varianc is infinit .
is it possibl that we can take the chebyshev idea , the law of larg number , and extend it to situat where we have variabl with an infinit varianc .
now , a priori , thi look like slightli stoni ground .
it doesn't look promis .
why ?
an infinit varianc connot , ye , you have a center here but you could be infinit far spread out .
and that creat complic , doe it not ?
let's see what will happen if you retrac the path , form a sampl mean , and then let's ask how doe thi sampl mean behav .
and some <num> year after chebyshev discov hi result khinchin in <num> show that the larg of law number continu to be in oper even if the individu variabl do not have varianc .
in other word the probabl that an absolut valu , the sampl mean deviat from it's expect valu , by as small an amount as epsilon for ani fix posit epsilon , will go to zero when n becom larg enough .
so here is a power gener of the law of larg number .
now , on of the casualti in our analysi is go to be , sadli , the fact that the rate at which we can comput these probabl now start to blow up .
but we got simpl estim for sampl size in term of desir error and desir confid , but now if the variabl don't have varianc , we must anticip that we're go to need to put in a much larger amount of effort .
you're go to need a much larger sampl befor we get ani kind of concentr near where the underli expect is .
and so it is .
so here's on direct for gener .
i want to explor thi further , but i do want to expos you to the basic kind here .
and you will forgiv me , i hope , if i don't try to prove thi result .
becaus now we understand that the moment we start to try to tweak a basic result and try to get more and more nuanc result out of it that there is go to be a correspond increas in the technic dexter we will need , more mathemat background that we will need .
now you will have seen that in the titl of the law of larg number i've put in the word weak .
okai , now the word weak then suggest that there's a correspond strong to go with it .
right , so the origin inequ of chebyshev handl what we todai call the weak law of larg number .
to see how we could strengthen the result in anoth direct , let's take a slightli differ vantag point .
so let's come back to the context of toss a coin .
imagin that we have a coin and we toss it repeatedli .
on , two , three , and so on .
ad infinitum .
now , i don't defi as alwai , head with a on , tail with a zero , and now we form the accumul sum , the partial sum of the sequenc .
now imagin , thi is a gedanken experi , a thought experi .
imagin thi coin ha been toss infinit often .
well , we start by form the run , run sum .
after on trial , you just have the first result divid by <num> .
that's a sampl mean after on trial .
after two trial , you've got a new sampl mean .
the sum of the first two variabl divid by <num> .
and if you keep do thi after n trial , you have the sampl mean sn divid by n .
and we keep do thi for everi valu of n .
what we've got now is a sequenc of sampl mean .
now , how doe thi sequenc of sampl mean behav ?
what can we sai about it ?
well so to begin , what we might want to do is see if we can plot it and see what might happen .
so i'm go to show for you now a portion of a sampl path between about <num> , <num> trial and <num> , <num> trial .
now the law of larg limit tell us that sinc the coin is fair sn over n should behav like on half with high probabl .
and inde it doe .
the base line for us with drawn correspond to sn over n be <num> .
and so now we're measur thing abov <num> .
in the particular toss i gener , we find that the varianc is near <num> .
but thei fluctuat , natur , becaus of cours thi is a , a chanc driven experi .
we notic that around <num> , <num> toss the error , the differ from <num> is within <num> , is between <num> and <num>1 .
that look veri good .
you have an area within <num> of the true amsal .
but , an unfortun thing happen as the number of trial increas .
around about <num> , <num> trial the error float briefli about <num> , and then it drop below <num> again , but then , at about <num> , <num> trial or so , it jump up , and now it's abov <num> .
eventu , it come back down below <num> , but then goe back abov <num> again .
okai , thi , you're true you're not veri far from point five , but you seem to repeatedli come closer and move farther awai .
so , here is a question .
wouldn't the chanc that , if you look at on particular sequenc .
in other word , somebodi's collect data and repeatedli toss a coin and see what happen to hi sampl mean .
what ar the chanc that the sampl mean will repeatedli move awai by more than <num> from <num> ?
of cours <num> is just an arbitrari number we pick .
pick a toler epsilon .
thi is your favorit small number .
in my class at penn , i'll ask my student , what of the small number ?
then most of them sai , i don't know .
i'll tell you .
my favorit small number is <num> to the power minu <num> .
but , pick your own .
make it fix but arbitrari .
the kei is you want to make it as small as you want , but not zero .
pick your epsilon .
what ar the chanc that a given trail , a given sampl part , deviat from point five by epsilon or more ?
repeatedli , again , and again , and again , and again , infinit often .
so let's take stock again .
i'm still deal now with a sequenc of repeat independ trial , where the variabl have an expect but not necessarili a finit varianc .
we found the sampl mean and now , we track the sequenc of sampl mean .
we know that for a larg enough number of trial , on averag the typic sampl mean is go to be close to the underli expect mu .
thi is the law of larg number of khinchin .
but , is it the case that as you follow on trail that ye on averag you're good but , that you period becom not good .
you becom bad .
you move by more than epsilon awai from the center .
four short year after khinchin prove hi result , kolmogorov attack hi quest .
so , the question here ask wa thi .
is it possibl that if you look at on trail , on sampl path , do the event of the sampl mean deviat from the center by more than epsilon , can happen infinit often .
kai lai chung , the probabilist , ha come up with an evoc short notat for infinit often .
call it io .
and so the question is , is it possibl for thi probabl of an infinit number of deviat from ep , but more than epsilon to occur .
and kolmogorov show that inde it wa go to not be possibl .
the probabl that on essenti all sampl part , that you deviat from mu by more than epsilon infinit often is zero .
anoth wai of sai thi is that almost all sampl part will have the properti that you deviat from mu by more than epsilon no more than a finit number of time .
or , yet again , thi sai that for almost all sequenc we have the properti that the sequenc will sooner or later get close to mu .
and onc it get close to mu , it never leav .
it alwai stai close to mu .
thi is a power gener of the weak law of of larg number .
and natur enough , we call thi the strong law of larg number .
thi is a weak law on steroid .
it got muscl .
okai .
from a practic point of view , the strong law is what tell us why pool realli work .
imagin that on is sampl from a popul to estim someth .
for exampl , which candid is win an elect .
and the data be report progress in time .
so after on dai we've got so much data and that is report .
but in anoth six hour even more data ha been collect so the sampl mean is adjust , increas , but now n ha becom larger .
it will be veri disquiet if we get an estim which we think is good , but as we get more data , we find the estim chang .
it becom bad .
at that point , then we start worri about well how do i know the poll is select at a good point in time .
that will be veri problemat .
what the strong law of larg number of kolmogorov tell us is that , we don't have to worri about it .
becaus poll and in gener sampl mean will eventu get close to the underli true but unknown expect .
and stai there .
now these law of larg number ar a fundament in the theori of probabl and , as we've seen , thei inform beauti gloriou applic all around us .
at their heart , you know , if we take awai all the technic sophist , what thei're sai is someth veri intuit .
an averag will give us answer close to the true probabl , as long as you averag enough .
veri intuit .
veri reason .
and in fact , if we go all the wai back to our first lectur thi wa at the heart of the frequentist idea of probabl due to robert phronesi .
we had to discard that becaus it fluctuat too much , but thi valid that frequentist institut and that is at it heart what the law of larg number doe .
in the ensu <num> year or , or so after kolmogorov , the law of larg number in both variant , weak and strong , have been expand in a myriad of wai .
and veri rich , veri deep , veri nuanc , veri sophist result have emerg , which show that there is concentr in all kind of random circumst .
of cours , to dig that deep our technic armor is go to have to need to be correspondingli larger .
so i will leav you with a stori .
the law of larg number is a fundament in probabl , and it inform for us , among other thing , why poll work .
why drug test work , and it also tell us how we can go about do appar intract comput .
we have more to come .
summari of tableau <num> .
the fabul limit law , part two .
the law of larg number in continu space , comput a' la mont carlo .
when we discov the law of larg number in the set of the binom through the art of chebyshev's inequ it wa alreadi clear in the analysi that the mode of think wa go to be wildli extens .
so the purpos of thi lectur wa to illustr some of the featur that emerg almost natur from that kind of analysi .
so , to begin we're go to have to extend and gener the background we start with .
so , we first start with build up a background lexicon that we can util .
i chose to special the present to a continu set just to illustr how thing thei grace smoothli from the discreet to the continu .
though as we've seen through the progress of thi tableau , the analysi and the result extend much more wide .
but accordingli , let's begin with a continu set and the kei here ar the continu analog of the idea of expect and varianc .
so to begin , consid a chanc variabl , x , which is govern by a probabl law confer by a mass densiti function , p of x .
recal , p of x connot , in on dimens , a probabl mass for unit length at the point x .
the expect of x now is defin as a continu analog of a probabilist center of mass .
of cours , we will call thi mu , or write it more formal as e of x .
it is now just a weight integr of valu weight accord to the mass densiti function .
now the moment we go down to infinit domain , there ar caveat we have to keep in the back of our mind .
what ar written down on the screen is an improp integr with infinit limit .
and we know , from basic calculu , that such integr might occasion fail to exist .
so , the caveat is if the expect exist , sadli there ar variabl and there ar densiti for which the expect doe not exist .
but in our set we have focus resolut on variabl where there is an expect .
and inde , where there is an ideal varianc as well .
the varianc connot the probabilist version of a moment of inertia .
it captur the expect squar deviat of the valu of a chanc variabl around it center , around it expect .
so we look at the deviat , squar it , weight it accord to do the densiti function and integr out .
now even if an expect exist , there's a small possibl that the integr might diverg to plu infin .
again , we focu resolut on set where we have expect and we have a varianc .
now with thi in hand , the varianc , as we have seen in the discret case , connot an expect squar spread around the center .
so the spread itself should be measur by the squar root of a varianc , or the standard deviat .
thi is actual captur beautifulli by the elementari but wonder inequ of pafnuti chebyshev .
so , what doe chebyshev tell us ?
chebyshev ask for the chanc that a chanc variabl deviat from it expect in absolut valu by more than a design amount .
let us dai design by the greek letter tau .
chebyshev's inequ give us a bound for thi probabl in term of the varianc .
so the probabl that x deviat from mu in absolut valu by more than a deviat tau is bound about by the ratio of the varianc to the squar of the deviat .
now , thi is elementari .
you should not run awai with the idea that thi is a veri tight and veri accur inequ .
the inequ is rather crude .
it's like take a veri blunt knife to a , soft situat .
you're go to get a crude cut .
it potenc li in the fact that it's so eleg and so simpl .
it requir so few constraint .
and it largest impact ar seen when thing ar independ .
and to captur thi , we focu on set where we have sum of variabl .
addit plai a larg role right through the entir theori .
and to begin we observ that expect is essenti a glorifi sum , a limit sum .
expect is alwai addit .
if we add independ to the mix then we find remark that varianc is also addit .
so , the expect of a sum is a sum of expect .
the varianc of a sum of independ summand is a sum of varianc .
thi is the background we need .
the tool which ar go to fuel the re gesta , the kei result to come .
so what ar the result that emerg from thi kind of background ?
we immedi start with the idea of a random sampl .
now what is a random sampl ?
recal a random sampl constitut independ select from some underli distribut .
let's sai gener chanc variabl is call x , it's got some probabl law .
and at thi stage , the law could be continu or it could be discret .
it make littl matter .
we're go to draw by independ sampl , a sequenc x1 , x2 , x3 , xn , and so forth .
independ , from the same law , the same distribut , as a gener x .
let us sai that there's underli distribut ha got common expect view and a common varianc sigma squar .
we'll promptli form the partial sum of thi independ sampl .
so , let s1 be x1 , s2 is x1 plu x2 , s3 is x1 plu x2 plu x3 , and so forth .
sn repres the nth partial sum .
now , observ then the variabl in the sum ar all independ copi of each other , statist speak .
thei're all drawn from the same distribut and therefor thei all have the same expect and the same varianc .
addit of expect immedi allow us to write down that expect of sn is n time the common expect view .
and becaus these summand ar assum to be independ , the varianc of sn is now n time the common varianc sigma squar .
it's a veri potent and power observ .
you see , becaus recal that spread is captur by the squar root of the varianc , the squar root of a varianc now behav like the squar root of n time sigma .
assuredli the expect is move linearli in n and for larg n is go veri far out .
and assuredli the spread around the center is increas with the number of step while the spread is increas much slower than the spread , the expect actual is move , right .
in <num> step , the spread is onli a factor of <num> .
in <num> , <num> step , the spread is onli a factor <num> .
thi potent observ , coupl with chebyshev's inequ , give us the law of larg number .
we call it the weak law of larg number becaus , as i point out , there ar stronger version of thi which can sai thing about the entir sequenc .
but let us focu on the weak law of larg number , for the nuanc .
and what doe thi sai ?
thi tell us that the ratio of sn to n , in other word , the sampl mean , deviat from it expect valu mu , an absolut valu , by as small an amount as epsilon .
what is epsilon ?
my favorit tini number , <num> to the minu <num> . <num> .
what you will .
fix , but arbitrari .
the probabl of such a deviat is bound about by the ratio of the varianc to n time epsilon squar .
for ani varianc , and ani epsilon howev small , as n becom larger and larger and larger the bound on the right goe off to <num> .
and therefor , in short , the phenomenon that we ar describ here is that the sampl mean , sn over n is increas concentr around it center , it expect , mu .
you know , you should paus to appreci the wonder that's emerg here .
we ar deal with a chanc experi .
the variabl x1 , x2 , x3 ar fluctuat randomli , uncontrol .
and we're just ad .
and somehow the sum of a bunch of randomli vari entiti is behav , properli normal by n , as if it were a constant .
it's as if all the uncertainti ha been wash awai and we're get a almost determinist answer .
thi , as we've seen , ha veri potent and power consequ .
we've seen a varieti of applic and it list is a smorgasbord of possibl , it's a small set of the variou thing we can actual do .
the earliest exampl , we saw wa that of poll and thi wa what motiv our entranc into thi cannon .
we see that we can estim proport of subpopul in a larg popul veri effici via a small sampl .
the same idea is tweak veri slightli to creat a doubl sampl .
can be util to check the efficaci of drug and thi is at the heart of drug test .
we can us these model more gener to estim expect or mean of underli process that ar a priori unknown .
for exampl , what is the mileag that you might expect in a new car ?
what is the rate of imperfect a semiconductor chip manufactur might expect in their chip ?
what is the rate of product in a shift at a factori ?
all of these ar presum govern by chanc law for which we do not a priori ahead of time .
know the expect .
but if we observ these phenomena over a period of time and averag them , then the law of larg number is go to tell us that the sampl mean is go to give us a veri good estim of the true underli expect .
these idea ar util in qualiti test , in the time to failur .
how long doe a comput have ?
what is it lifetim ?
how long will a light bulb last ?
how long befor an airplan becom unsaf ?
what is the life expect of a bridg ?
these ar all question of time to failur .
if you think of turn and shake of death as failur then we can util these idea to design actuari tabl for life expect , for risk .
all of these base upon the law of larg number .
go back in time , the earliest exampl , where peopl intuit a larg number of number wa in the theori of game .
and of cours , the law of law of larg number now feed in directli into a model , a theori of fair game .
more subtl and sophist applic aris when we move into what appear to be determinist set where we have to add a larg group of quantiti for you to integr known function .
and there , the complex of the problem , as we've seen , can blow up veri quickli with dimens to the point where it becom fundament intract becaus of a limit in the resourc avail .
remark , in the middl of the 20th centuri the discoveri of fermi , and alarm , show us that we can replac determinist comput by the strang and wonder idea , a probabilist comput .
thi ensembl suit of replic that we call mont carlo method .
remark .
these method now have becom a fundament in the 21st centuri .
thei permeat essenti everi scienc .
the law of larg number have applic in other area , for exampl , in the design of optim stock portfolio .
how doe on alloc resourc in a diversifi manner so as to maxim our return ?
thi is a small , a veri small set , of the possibl applic of the law of larg number .
what i hope to have done is to have stimul your curios , to explor more wide .
now with thi under our belt , let us go back in our next tableau to the question of pose .
the issu at hand there wa the law of larg number give us larg guarante as to why poll work , why drug test work .
but we conclud tableau <num> , part on with the observ that , encourag as these result were , the crude applic of chebyshev's inequ gave us popul of sampl estim which were still much too larg for comfort .
the question now is , can we revis downward our requir , our estim so that we can come up with estim which ar practic feasibl and appeal ?
thi investig will take us in a beauti new direct , and like a flower unfold we'll find the bell curv emerg from these ruin .
thi is go to be the subject of our next tableau .
we now turn to the question of quantifi , just how good our poll realli is .
so recal thi is our basic question .
we start with a random sampl of the newli trial from an underli popul whose buyer is p .
we form the accumul sum s sub n , and look at the rel frequenc of success , s sub n divid by n .
and the question is , how good is thi realli , as an approxim for p ?
now the listen will well understand that we ar deal with a chanc govern process .
and in a chanc govern process , error ar go to be endem .
we ar not go to be abl to , in gener , get exact answer .
we ar go to have to provid approxim answer and there's go to be a certain margin for error , an error toler that we have to suppos .
in addit , the fact that it is a chanc game mean that repeat perform of thi experi will give , in gener , differ answer .
and , therefor , we cannot give absolut certainti that someth is go to happen .
we can onli provid a probabilist guarante .
in other word , if we sai that there's a certain amount of error , we can have no more than a certain amount of confid in our pronounc , and thi is becaus of the veri natur of chanc .
and ty all of thi togeth ar the underli data themselv .
our pronounc ar onli go to be as good as the data , and in particular , the amount of data .
so let us suppos now that the data have proper provid .
thei in fact , ar aris as a random sampl implicitli that there is independ of the trial and that an underli popul is be fairli and uniformli sampl .
onc thi is the case , then our perform guarante ar ti entir with the amount of data that we have , the sampl size , n .
the error , the confid , and the sampl size ar three paramet , and thei ar intric connect in thi process .
thei form a danc where on influenc the other .
of cours we now have ampl reason to believ that thi kind of empir estim of the underlin proport p is good .
we have good reason to believ that there ar , that thi kind of estim is principl .
it is like to give us good result , but we want more .
we want a quantit prescript as to exactli how good thi is .
now the listen should gird up her notat loin , becaus at thi point , we're go to have to inevit delv into some abstract .
we're go to need notat , and we're go to have to understand how the notat fit into the problem domain .
all right ?
so let's build thi up by first start to look at a simpl , concret exampl .
so , let us consid a set where we ar sampl from an underli popul where a proport p of <num> of the popul is of a certain type , sai on .
and the remain proport q , or <num> , is of type zero .
let us sai we sampl randomli from thi popul .
in other word , we have random sampl and let's sai we look at a sampl of size ten .
so here's an exampl , x1 through x10 ar the result of bernoulli trial whose success probabl is <num> .
but bear in mind we don't know <num> .
thi is someth that we would dearli love to know .
'kai .
but we don't know it .
it's a fix number .
it is go to be reveal to us gradual through the sampl .
so , i gener a particular sequenc us a random number gener on my comput , set the bia to be <num> .
and here's the particular sequenc i came up with , a on , two zero , three on and four zero .
the number of accumul success in our notat s with a subscript <num> , in thi case , is clearli <num> .
there ar four on in thi process .
and of cours we realiz , we know , that the number of accumul success , when there ar <num> trial with success probabl <num> is govern by a binomi distribut with exactli these paramet .
<num> trial , success probabl , <num> .
the specif form of distribut is known to us , right ?
and in our complex notat , we introduc the letter b for the binomi , and paramet <num> for the number of trial , <num> for the success probabl , and the actual number of success k run between <num> and a maximum of <num> there .
and these ar given by the binomi probabl , and you've seen , now by now , what look like a veri familiar curv .
in our experi , we've got exactli four success and we've highlight that on the figur .
and thi occur for the case of <num> trial where the probabl veri slightli in excess of about <num> .
okai , now we ar go to us s<num> divid by <num> .
as an estim of p , which is <num> .
in our exampl , s<num> over <num> is <num> divid by <num> , or <num> .
our estim make a <num> error .
the error is <num> .
and thi lead to a more gener question .
let's again keep the paramet , p equal to <num> fix , thi is fix but a prioriti ar known to us .
let's fix the number of trial at n equal to <num> .
and let's fix , let's sai the amount of area that we're will to toler as let us sai <num> .
so of cours in our exampl , we ar make an error larger than what we can toler .
we ar make a <num> error for thi data .
but here now is a gener question .
if mani peopl perform thi experi , in other word , a larg number of peopl , each of them gener ten trial accord to thi bernoulli probabl , what is the expect number of these individu ?
whose estim of p is <num> over <num> , differ from p by no more than <num> ?
formal , what is the probabl that the rel frequenc of success , s<num> over <num> , differ from the true probabl , p equal to <num> , by at most , <num> ?
but let's promptli set thi up , right ?
now , at thi point , we're go to actual have to do a real comput .
right .
the basic question sai , i want my rel frequenc of success , s<num> over <num> , to differ from p by no more than <num> .
in other word , i want s<num> over <num> to be no smaller than <num> minu <num> and no larger than <num> plu <num> .
and so write it down mathemat , we ar look at the probabl that a rel frequenc of success li between <num> on the on hand , and <num> on the other .
now we should promptli now figur out what the event at hand is .
'kai .
let's clear the denomin by multipli throughout by <num> and rewrit thi as sai thi is the probabl that the accumul number of success in <num> trial of toss a coin with success probabl <num> is between 5and <num> .
in other word , the accumul number of success is <num> , or <num> , or <num> .
and , of cours , in your figur , these correspond to three set and with three particular binomi probabl .
our event then is compris of the three integ <num> , <num> , and <num> .
and by addit , the probabl of the event is just the sum of the three binomi probabl .
of cours the notat is look cumbrou and difficult .
but bear in mind here that the number of trial , n equal to <num> is fix .
the success probabl , p equal to <num> is also fix .
and what's vari here is the number of success , <num> , <num> , and <num> .
and all that is done is to write thi express down and now all is over bother shout .
all we've got to do is plug in these binomi probabl into express for the binomi and simpli act them .
here's a simpl numer estim remain .
you could plug thi into your , a local scientif calcul .
plug it into your comput if you have a littl softwar program .
or you can simpli fire up your favorit internet browser , and in the search domain , type in binomi calcul .
and you'll find a varieti of free binomi calcul that ar avail for you on the internet .
plug in the paramet and you'll find these number .
add them up and find that the desir probabl is about <num> .
there is about a two in three chanc that your rel frequenc of success is within <num> of the true but unknown answer .
the point howev , princip estim , do we not , right ?
now , two paramet have come into plai here .
the first , the amount we deviat from the true answer .
thi is the error .
and the particular error toler we specifi here is <num> or <num> .
the second factor that aris here is the probabl that we land within thi error toler of the true answer .
thi is a confid in our estim .
so we can roughli sai that our estim give us no more than a <num> with a confid of about <num> .
now thi is a simpl numer exampl that's not veri hard .
but of cours , you know , we can't simpli comput numer exampl again and again .
it doesn't tell us veri much about an underli structur .
we'd like to intuit , figur out what is the underli analyt structur so we can make predict from thi .
so we want to veri quickli gener thi .
let's do thi in two stage .
first , let us keep the success probabl , the proport of the underli popul , fix at <num> .
and now let us ask the follow question .
what happen as the sampl size n increas ?
how doe the confid vari as it increas the sampl size ?
let's take stock , and take a look at it again .
so here's our basic problem .
so , now we have a sampl size n , and we're look at a rel frequenc of success in that sampl , sn divid by n .
of cours , sn now is govern by a binomi distribut correspond to end trial of acquir with success probabl , <num> and of cours we have these binomi probabl which ar now veri familiar to us .
we've alreadi seen the case when n is equal to <num> .
in thi case , the chanc of make a <num> error is given by the sum of the three binomi probabl for our number of success equal to <num> , <num> or <num> .
what if we increas the number of trial to sai n equal to <num> ?
well , then we get a binomi distribut correspond to <num> toss of a coin with success probabl <num> .
it is go to be center at <num> time <num> , all right ?
in other word , it's go to be center at <num> .
if the rel frequenc of success in the sampl s50 divid by <num> is to be within <num> of the true answer , then the rel frequenc must lie between <num> and <num> .
<num> time <num> is <num> .
<num> time <num> is <num> .
and so thi sai a cumul number of success in <num> trial should be between <num> and <num> .
and now we simpli add up the binomi probabl .
bob's your uncl .
it's as simpl as that .
but let's go on step further .
what if we increas the number of trial to <num> ?
well it's exactli the same game now .
we now have a binomi distribut correspond to <num> toss of the coin .
we want the rel frequenc between <num> and <num> , <num> time <num> is <num> .
<num> time <num> is <num> , which mean a cumul number of success ha to be between <num> and <num> , and we simpli add up the binomi probabl .
of cours do thi by hand is veri soon go to becom tediou .
and of cours we want to have recours to a scientif calcul or a program on the comput which calcul binomi probabl or just do it over the internet .
type in binomi calcul and just sai , comput these probabl for these paramet .
and if you do thi , you will find these number .
the probabl is about <num> , two in three , when n is <num> .
it is about <num> when n is <num> .
it's about <num> when n is <num> .
or you have to get it in address .
the chanc that your estim will make more than a <num> error , your chanc that your estim will be about <num> or below <num> is about on in three when in thi state .
it's onli about <num> , when n is <num> .
and it's a realli small <num> , when n is <num> .
it is clear , that as n increas , the concentr phenomenon is work in our favor .
and we'll veri quickli concentr probabl around the expect valu .
a rel small sampl is give us veri good estim , most of the time .
now , let's quickli abstract the basic principl .
tableau <num> , the fabul limit law , part <num> .
the bell curv fit in , why poll realli work .
and so we have come to the end of thi repast .
well , of the main cours at least .
the magisteri law of larg number that we have seen is in mani wai , the most intuit part of the theori , that which is most in accord with our nativ intuit .
and yet , as we have seen , there ar unexpect eddi , littl subtleti which ar not appar to the ey .
a prosaic , even dull , applic of chebyshev's inequ is alreadi potent in thi context .
we have seen , immedi , that it give us a principl to mathemat justif for the valid of pull mechan , for drug test , and even for probabilist comput .
and yet , the sampl size estim that deriv from thi naiv applic of chebyshev's inequ ar still a littl too larg for comfort .
even it origin would not claim that the inequ is tight .
and so , a natur attempt at improv the result is to start with chebyshev's basic inequ and see whether it can be improv , tighten .
thi is a veri fertil field of endeavor .
and in the centuri and a half sinc inequ first made it appear , it ha devolv into subtl and deep inequ , exponenti inequ and concentr idea which ar current to thi veri dai .
thi is inde a potent and power wai forward .
but , we shall take a differ tack , and in fact , we'll go back to the dawn of the calculu , about four centuri ago .
and a remark , unlook for , serendipit idea that emerg in full bloom from appar a barren desert of idea .
thi wa the remark bell curv .
we had seen a bell like curv make a rather mysteri appear when we look at the binomi .
and natur to get a just understand of where thi phenomenon come up we should return to that most elementari of set .
the toss of a coin .
so let us go back and consid the repeat toss of a fair coin .
we're consid a situat where we have symmetr bernoulli trial , in other word , fair coin flip .
as alwai , we will denot the success by on , failur by zero , and we have an independ sequenc of on and zero that we'll label x1 , x2 , x3 , xn and so forth .
in our notat , these can note symmetr bernoulli trial or bernoulli trial with success probabl p equal to on half .
natur , we form accumul sum and onc you form the accumul success over end trial we get what we call s subscript n or simpli sn as a sum of the first nx .
sn denot a number of success and n toss off a fair coin .
of cours , we know now that thi govern by a binomi distribut with two paramet , n , the number trial , and the success probabl , which in thi case is on half .
we have a discret set and of cours it's complet categor by a mass function .
the mass function attach to atom the atom probabl that we call b sub n of k .
with a paramet littl p , which in thi case it gave us on half .
and said the binomi probabl simplifi in form .
thei ar the form n choos k time <num> to the power minu n , .
and k run through the possibl for the number of success , <num> , <num> , <num> , <num> , up till n .
we know that thi distribut ha a center of mass and expect exactli at n over <num> .
and a varianc at , as n over <num> .
by now , we have a fairli good understand of thi most basic of object , the binomi .
the question at hand is , how doe thi distribut behav as n march on and becom larger and larger and larger ?
and so here ar a coupl of pictur .
sai , we look at a sequenc of valu , n is ten , <num> , <num> , and <num> .
and , as you can see , the distribut march on to the right get increasingli spread out and more congest .
and alreadi certain interest featur ar begin to becom appar .
but on of the thing we will promptli need to do is to find some mechan for compar all these differ distribut for differ valu of n all under the same framework .
so , let's take a look at thi pictur again .
and thi time realiz that what character each of these distribut is it expect valu , which is grow with n as n over two and a varianc .
ye , assuredli as n increas the distribut is get more and more and more spread out .
but the spread , as we've seen , is small compar to how far the expect is move .
a natur wai to character thi is , first , to center the distribut at it center .
in other word , at n over <num> .
and look at it on a proper scale .
in other word , by divid the standard deviat .
so , let's introduc a new variabl .
for everi valu n , let sn star denot sn , center to the origin by subtract it expect valu and then normal to a unit's spread by divid by it standard deviat .
what we've realli done is taken the accumul success and made them dimensionless .
center and dimensionless .
of cours , we realiz that here the expect of sn is exactli n over <num> .
and the varianc is n over <num> .
and so our express becom sn minu n over <num> divid by in the denomin on half of the squar root of n .
here is a new chanc variabl , and as it increas we get a sequenc of chanc variabl .
of cours , each of these variabl is inherit from sn , and therefor inherit the binomi distribut , except that it's go to be recent and rescal so the axi is go to be scale till we have at least it spread to the unit .
what doe the mass function of thi standard scale variabl look like ?
now sn star , a properli center and scale of version sn is itself a discreet variabl .
it is now center at <num> so the valu sn star take ar scatter around the origin .
the spread is normal unit so each of the sn star is spread essenti the same rang .
at least most of the probabl li within sai two or three unit of the origin .
but it is still a discret variabl and it inherit it's mass function entir from sn .
in other word , each of the curv you see is go to get rescal and move to form the mass function for sn star .
let's take a quick look at it .
so start on the screen from the upper left , clockwis , all the wai down , you see n equal to <num> , n equal to <num> , n equal to <num> and n equal to <num> .
these recent , rescal mass function .
doe anyth leap out at you ?
inde , it doe .
these function all look remark similar .
take into account , of cours , the fact that , as n increas , sn star ha got more and more point , place where it take valu .
but the mass function , if interpol through , is begin to look more and more like a bell curv .
now to be sure there is a vertic normal to be taken account of .
and thi aris becaus as it increas there ar more and more point where sn and therefor sn star take valu .
and therefor the probabl mass is get more and more spread out .
and therefor the height the probabl ar decreas .
but properli normal , it doe appear that the curv ar look increasingli bell like .
and thi lead to a power and potent and specul idea that it just mai be possibl to comput binomi probabl approxim by area under a bell curv .
the appear of a bell like charact in the binomi distribut suggest that we take a closer look at the popular bell curv .
the bell curv , in the popular languag , is more formerli known as the normal densiti .
the terminolog is due to franci galton and karl pierson , who coin it in the earli part of the 20th centuri becaus of it appar preval in all kind of sundri applic .
it wa the normal curv .
it is also , in some quarter , call the gaussian densiti .
the first person to make extens us of thi wa carl friedrich gauss in the earli part of the 19th centuri .
so , we're all familiar with the bell curv .
but what is it formal and mathemat ?
well mathemat us gauss's notat , we call it a function .
littl phi of x .
phi of x ha got thi particular form .
it's not complet an elementari function , is it ?
but it's not a difficult function .
what doe it behav like ?
what doe it look like ?
now the graph is someth we're all veri familiar with .
casual acquaint in the popular literatur ha made us veri familiar with thi curv .
it's got a bell like charact .
it's complet formal character by the mathemat equat abov it .
now , thi is the standard bell curv , the normal densiti .
the listen who ha brave the danger bend tableau six part two will have seen thi make an incident appear as an exampl of a densiti .
now , we're go to put it to us .
now , our observ that the normal densiti , the bell curv , could fit the binomi mass function suggest that probabl might be obtain by comput area .
in other word , we've taken a communitori problem and reduc it to a geometr problem , on of comput area .
it will be us to cap , get some nomenclatur here , some terminolog under a bell up front befor we go into the detail .
so accordingli , pick ani point t on the x axi .
our object is to categor the area under the bell curv to the left of t .
in other word , the area all the wai in principl from minu infin up til t .
now , of cours , todai we can comput thi easili and simpli on ani modern comput .
or on could even just type it into the internet and get a quick numer free estim .
so , thi is easi to do .
now , consid what happen as we move t .
if t move to the left toward minu infin , then the area decreas smoothli and in the limit near minu infin area is exactli zero .
so the area increas from zero at minu infin all the wai through t , and as it goe past thi point , as t increas all the wai to past infin , the area keep increas .
we've got a posit function , and therefor the area will increas as the endpoint move to the right .
and then what happen as the endpoint t goe to plu infin ?
well at that point , we get the entir area under the curv .
on of the reason for defin the curv in exactli thi fashion with a normal factor of <num> over the squar root of <num> pi  is that the area ha been normal to unit .
and therefor , if we plot as a function of t , what happen to the area from t all the wai to the left ?
we find that the area increas smoothli , start at zero at minu infin , and then you have a smooth s shape curv , and the curv satur an area on at plu infin .
in other word , we've describ a function of a real variabl , t .
thi particular function ha a name .
it's call the normal distribut function , and of cours , it's got a symbol which character it .
we've us the lower case greek letter phi to character the normal curv , the bell curv , the densiti .
we us the upper case greek letter phi to character the distribut function associ with it .
and formal , of cours , an area in the languag of calculu is an integr .
so if you had ani calculu , you could write down an express , at least a formal express , for the distribut function big phi of t as the integr from minu infin to t of littl phi of x .
what doe thi mean ?
well , thi just mean and if you're not familiar with integr , we just take it to mean the area under the curv from minu infin up to the point t .
as you allow t to vari , we get a smooth and increas function , the distribut function of the normal .
now , thi is a start point .
the idea is that the big phi , the distribut function , captur an area and we should be abl to put that to us in captur probabl .
let us turn now to the properli scale and center binomi variabl .
sn star given by sn minu n over <num> , properli scale to squar root of n over <num> .
and we saw that sn star ha got a particular mass function .
let us see what happen now if you attempt to fit a properli normal bell curv through these point .
when we do that , we find realli a quit remark good fit .
a close examin show that the fit is least effect when n is small .
but as n becom larger and larger and larger and larger , the fit get better and better and better and better .
quit alarmingli so .
now , how do you comput probabl from a discret set ?
well , we simpli sum up the mass function , the atom probabl .
for exampl , if you're , if we're interest in the question , what is the chanc that sn star take valu in a given interv , we just sum up the mass insid that interv .
if we ask , what's the probabl that sn star take valu no larger than some given t ?
then we just sum up all the mass of sn star up to that point t .
of cours , if t is consid to be a variabl then we get a function of t .
thi is call the distribut function of your scale variabl sn star .
how doe the distribut function look like ?
well , let's think about it first .
a gener sn star ha got mass function which look like thi bell curv .
you've got littl thing that go up and down like thi and then decreas smoothli .
now , if you want to add up the mass up to a given t , then you're go to start out near infin at zero .
and then the first time you hit a mass , the valu jump up by that mass amount and then stai flat till the next mass , it jump up by that mass amount .
stai flat .
jump up .
of cours the size of the step ar vari .
thei depend upon the mass of the atom that you encount .
but we ineluct have a step charact for thi function fn star .
of cours , we're go to try to approxim thi step function by simpli look at the area under the bell curv .
but that is a smoothli increas function .
how do thei compar ?
well let's take a look .
when n equal to <num> , you can see the step function for sn star , the distribut function , and cut through it the smooth variat of the distribut function .
an odditi you sai that the distribut function of the normal is alreadi veri close everywher to the distribut function , the probabl for the standard binomi .
as it increas , the fit get better and better and better and at n equal to <num> the fit is quit remark good .
the pictori evid is veri , veri strong here , right ?
thi suggest that probabl for binomi view in the proper scale mai be well approxim by appropri area under a bell curv .
thi visual evid is compel .
and take us to thi power discoveri from four centuri ago .
abraham de moivr discov the effect of the bell curv , the normal , that we have walk our wai through pictori .
he did thi in <num> , in the <num> year after the dawn of calculu .
you must understand that , at thi time , there were no fanci displai that he could look to .
no simpl comput on a desktop comput to churn through numer these distribut .
so , the investig inevit had to be done by hand , abstractli , analyt .
it is all the more remark that such a beauti and eleg realiz came to the fore .
de moivr wrote about the nomin approxim to the binomi in <num> .
de moivr work with a fair coin , p is equal to on half .
it took a full <num> year befor the idea wa gener and the next step wa taken .
and thi wa taken by pierr simon , marqui de laplac , and in <num> , he show that thi realiz of the moivr extend seamlessli , even if the coin wa bent .
in other word , even if the success probabl , p , wa not on half .
and thi led to thi epoch theorem that todai we call the result of de moivr and laplac .
so , let's start with a set .
so , our basic set is that of repeat independ trial , and to begin we ar go to deal with the toss of a coin whose success probabl is some valu p between zero and on .
so other word x1 , x2 , x3 , xn , and so forth , constitut the bernoulli trial with success probabl p .
we're natur interest in the accumul number of success s of n .
so , for everi n , s of n is a sum of the xs from <num> through n and we know that for each n , sn is now govern by a binomi distribut with two paramet , the number of trial , n , and the success probabl of the coin , p .
our experi with the fair coin suggest that we should promptli , to view the sn holist across n , we should center the distribut at the expect , and scale it so that we're look at a unit scale .
in other word , a dimensionless problem .
accordingli , we form , in the proper scale , a new variabl for each n .
sn star center at the origin by subtract from sn it expect valu , and scale to have unit spread by divid thi by the standard deviat of sn , or in other word , the squar root of the varianc .
we recal that the binomi sn ha got expect n time p .
and it ha a varianc n time p , time <num> minu p , and so the express simplifi into thi fraction .
okai .
the theorem of de moivr and laplac deal with thi normal variabl .
you will admit justli that all we have done is properli center the distribut and view it in the proper scale so that we could view all of them on the same framework .
the de moivr laplac theorem now sai the follow , pick ani valu a and b , a is less than b .
we'd like to ask , what is the probabl that the discret variabl sn star , for a given n , li between a and b ?
in other word , we want to accumul the mass function for sn star in the rang from a to b .
that's what addit tell us .
the approxim by the bell curv sai that the sum of those probabl mai be well approxim by the area under a bell curv .
and the area be from a to b .
so , that integr notat just stand for area , and if you're not familiar with integr calculu , just think of it as an area under a given function , a given curv .
we could relat thi to the distribut function as follow .
the area under the bell curv from a to b can be obtain first by look at the entir area to the left of b .
of cours , that's what we call the distribut function of the normal , evalu at b .
and then take awai from thhe entir area , all the area from a to the left .
and therefor , we get a simpl form for thi in term of the distribut function .
big phi of b minu big phi of a , the de moivr laplac theorem sai that the probabl that a properli center and scale binomi li between ani two fix valu , is given approxim by the area under the bell curv from a to b .
and that thi approxim get better and better and better as n becom larg .
now , there ar a coupl of comment we need to make on thi .
first , i have not given you a proof of thi result .
and at some level that is unavoid .
thi is the first time we're go to encount a result which is go to requir more than pure elementari and easi mechan .
there ar not mani proof of thi result , and i can't sai that ani of them is complet elementari or easi .
at least as can be shown in a first year and a colleg class .
right .
so , to get a full understand of the subtleti and nuanc of thi result , we ar go to need more mathemat in our armori , and i shall not dive into those water , okai ?
we'll take our pictori evid as compel and take thi result at face valu .
a second question that might come across a student's mind is , well , thi is not complet satisfactori perhap becaus on the left is a probabl i would like to evalu .
a probabl involv the accumul success and the toss of a coin .
a probabl involv a binomi distribut .
on the right , i've got an asymptot statement which sai that as the number of trial becom larg , then we get a behavior of a certain kind , a limit behavior .
a question natur then is , well , how larg doe it have to be befor thi approxim is good ?
or in the variat of the same theme , for a given n , if we approxim a binomi probabl by thi area under a normal curv , how much error do we make ?
perfectli legitim question , and import , and again let me form , to solv , by an empir observ which can be support by some theori .
the asymptot in these set kick in veri , veri , veri fast .
a typic rule of thumb is to sai that if n is around <num> , you alreadi get veri good approxim , typic .
it also depend upon how skew the coin is .
the closer the coin is to be fair , the quicker the approxim kick in .
the more skew the coin is , the smaller p get , or the larger p get , the more skew the underli binomi distribut and the longer it take for the nomin approxim to kick in .
but even in extrem case , gener , the approxim kick in veri , veri fast , by typic at around <num> , we should see veri good fit to the underli probabl .
anoth rule of thumb is to sai , well , if n time p or n time q is bigger than five , then we should get good approxim , and inde we do .
it's sort of delv deeper into the qualiti of approxim , which inevit is go to get us into an algebra morass .
let us be satisfi with a slogan .
okai .
to wit , that binomi probabl , view in the proper scale and properli center , ar govern approxim by the area under a bell curv , even for modest valu of n .
arm with thi mysteri approxim us a bell curv , let us return to our applic of poll .
we have seen why poll have a princip justif via the law of larg number .
our difficulti then wa not that it didn't seem to work , but that the sampl estim were just a littl uncomfort too larg for our tast .
so let's go back and take a look at it again through a new prism , through normal approxim , and see where it get us .
so let's review veri quickli the model for a poll .
we have an underli popul , which ha got two subpopul in proport sai , p and q , where q is , of cours , <num> minu p .
p and q ar fix but unknown .
we'll want to estim p , and we do thi through the mechan of repeat independ trial where we sampl , at random , with replac from the underli popul .
thi engend a sequenc of bernoulli trial , x1 , x2 , x3 through letter sai xn , where each of these take valu <num> with a probabl p , and <num> with a probabl q .
we form the accumul success by ad these xs .
develop ha led us to conclud that it is reason to estim the fix but unknown p by the known but chanc vari sampl mean sn divid by n .
of cours , the moment we make an estim of a fix quantiti by a chanc vari element , then we make error , and we can onli make pronounc with some confid .
we've seen how the error in the estim , the confid in our pronounc , and the sampl size all interact beautifulli .
chebyshev's inequ tell us that a probabl that our sampl mean deviat from the underli probabl p in absolut valu by epsilon or more is no more than the reciproc of <num> time n epsilon squar .
and we'd like those to be no more than some given small delta .
we want a confid of <num> minu delta that we don't make an error as big as thi .
and thi lead us immedi to a veri , veri simpl proscript .
if n exce the reciproc of <num> epsilon squar delta , then we can guarante an estim error of no more than epsilon with a confid of at least <num> minu delta .
and we saw that immedi , numer it give rise to number like those you see on the screen .
in particular , if we demand an error of no more than <num> in our estim of p and we want a confid of <num> , then the sampl size that is requisit is about <num> , <num> .
now , that doesn't sound veri much , especi when on is deal with larg popul of million or even billion .
but get an estim of even <num> , <num> individu is labori , time consum , expens .
we realiz that thi estim is suffici , but might not be necessari .
we might be abl to trim some fat from thi estim .
and the suggest is , aris becaus of the inequ of chebyshev , which is like a blunt instrument .
we ar take a cleaver to cut butter .
in the process of make an estim in upper bound , the estim wa perhap a bit too gener , and therefor , the sampl size estim then also becom a littl bit too larg .
let us see where normal approxim leav us with thi desiderata .
to begin , we want to comput a probabl that a sampl mean deviat from a fix but unknown probabl p by more than epsilon .
thi is a bad event .
okai , if thi happen , then our estim is consid to be bad .
epsilon is our toler , whatev it is , <num> , <num> .
what have you .
let's sort of massag thi relationship into a form where we can util the result that we know .
first , let's clear the denomin by divid by n to write thi sn minu n time p over n , an absolut valu deviat from epsilon .
now , the numer on the left is beautifulli center .
sn minu np is now center at <num> becaus we realiz that sn ha expect n time p .
we would now like to scale it in the proper scale .
the proper scale goe as the standard deviat of sn .
would we recal is the squar root of n time p time q .
accordingli , let's rearrang the term by make the denomin squar root of npq .
and to make thing work out , i'll have to take the squar root of n from the denomin , and move it into the numer on the right .
and divid a new , the right hand side by the squar root of pq , and now , i've got an ident .
all right , thi look promis .
insid the absolut valu on the right , i've got exactli my properli center and properli scale version of sn , what we call sn star .
and so our , our equat now becom a probabl that in absolut valu sn star exce a given quantiti which depend upon our toler epsilon , it depend upon the sampl size n , and it depend upon the unknown probabl p and q , which is <num> minu p .
let's simplifi our notat a littl bit and take thi entir ratio on right and give it a name .
let's call it sai , z .
so z stand for epsilon , time the squar root of n divid by the squar root of pq .
and so our desir probabl can be written veri compactli as the probabl that an absolut valu , sn star exce z .
now , let's take stock and figur out what we have done so far .
z is someth which is govern by the air of toler , the sampl size , and also the unknown probabl p .
no matter , z is some fix number .
an absolut valu sn star exceed z mean that sn star is either to the right of z or sn star is to the left of minu z .
and how do we comput a probabl ?
well , we simpli sum the atom mass in that rang , sum all the atom mass of sn star to the right of z and to the left of minu z .
and that should give us the probabl , bob's your uncl .
of cours , an explicit computationalist probabl is intract .
the binomi is not friendli in that regard .
we can't hope to get a close form answer for thi .
but the normal approxim of the and laplac tell us that thi probabl can be approxim well if n is even modestli larg by the area under a bell curv .
normal approxim beckon .
so , we start with a bell curv .
thi is the function we call littl v of x .
if we want , we could write down an explicit function form , though that is not requisit here .
it's realli e to the minu x squar over <num> , over the normal , which is the reciproc of the squar root of <num> pi  .
but no matter , thi is what the curv look like .
and all we have to do is identifi the point z and minu z .
look at the area to the left of minu z , the area to the right of plu z , and add them up .
and that give us an estim for the probabl of the right .
thi is beauti , we can do some simplif here .
when we observ that by the symmetri of thi function , the area to the left of minu z is exactli equal to the area to the right of plu z .
and therefor the entir probabl is approxim by twice the area to the right of z under the normal curv .
now what do we need from thi .
well in a bell , we ar try to estim the probabl of a bad event .
that is that our estim , sadli , differ in absolut valu from the thing i'm try to estim , the popul propuls , p , by epsilon or more .
howev tini the epsilon that is the desir toler , i want to be insid that epsilon .
if thi ever distrigg then someth bad ha happen that is in other word i'd like to have a high confid that someth bad doesn't happen .
in other word i would like the probabl of someth bad happen to be small .
how small ?
well of cours , no more than our given confid paramet , delta .
now delta is broken up into two piec .
a portion where sn star is larger than z and a portion where sn star is smaller than minu z .
by asymmetri thei ar equal in size , at least in a normal approxim , and therefor we simpli apport , equal confid .
delta over <num> and delta over <num> to the both side .
togeth , thei add up to delta .
oh , veri good .
at thi point , we simpli sai that our oper principl is as follow .
rememb , how did we select z ?
z depend in a complic wai on epsilon , the error toler on the sampl size n , and on the underli fix but unknown probabl p .
if we select z to be that uniqu number .
such that the area to the right of z , under the normal curv , is delta over <num> .
now , let's see what happen .
if we select z to be <num> , the area to the right is exactli half the area to the normal curv , which is unit .
as z increas , the area of the normal curv to the right decreas from on half steadili all the wai down to zero as it becom veri , veri larg and goe in infin .
and therefor , at some specif point there's a valu of z , at which the area to the right is exactli delta over two .
the moment that happen , we've got our confid guarante .
select the valu of z , base upon thi delta that is given to us .
thi is call the quantil of the normal .
all right , we ar revers engin a probabl .
instead of sai give me a point and then figur out the probabl associ with that area .
we ar sai give me a probabl and then find which point get me to that probabl .
give me a z , z which ha an area of delta over two to the right .
onc you have that quantil .
at just the valu of n , to try to get a valu for epsilon time squar root of n , divid by the squar root of pq , which is at least as big as that z .
becaus n is an integ , i might not be abl to hit that quantil exactli .
in which case , go to the smallest integ which get me to the right of z .
now the moment that happen the area in the tail , the right tail and the left tail , is now assuredli no more than delta .
here is our oper principl .
you fix an epsilon , you fix a delta .
find the quantil correspond to delta over <num> .
let's us z .
onc you have that z , select an end big enough such that you get at least the valu of z .
the moment you do that we've got a normal approxim .
the desir probabl in the limit of larg n is approxim twice the area under the normal curv from z to infin , the area to the right of the normal curv .
and that , by construct , is twice delta over <num> , or delta .
thi is love .
we should promptli take stock , and savor thi beauti result .
recal , what have we done ?
we're given an epsilon and a delta , an error of toler , and a confid paramet .
we want a confid of on minu delta , where the error is no more than epsilon .
what is our procedur ?
find a quantil z for which the area under the curv to the right of z is delta over <num> .
now select a sampl size n big enough such that epsilon time the squar root of n divid by the squar root of pq is at least that valu z .
the moment you do that you've got a , a probabl which will not exce delta .
okai , immedi now .
thi tell you what the size of n is go to be .
revers engin it , right .
move the squar root of pq from the denomin to the numer on the left .
squar quantiti , move the epsilon squar awai and we sai that we'll requir the size of n , the number of data point the sampl size to be at least the quantil z , which depend on delta squar , time p time q , which is <num> minu p , divid by epsilon squar .
unfortun , the sampl size requisit seem to depend upon the unknown p .
but recal that you've alreadi seen , when we look at the chebyshev's inequ for the binomi , that p time <num> minu p , p time q , never exce on quarter .
in fact , it achiev on quarter exactli when p and q ar on half .
and therefor , it will be suffici to select for n , the valu , the quantil squar divid by <num> epsilon squar .
and thi select , under a normal approxim , will work for ani valu of p .
here is a crisp , beauti and simpl estim of the sampl size need for a given problem .
p is unknown .
we ar given an error total , and it's epsilon .
we ar given a confid acquir of <num> minu delta .
from here , we comput a quantil , which is just an area under a fix curv .
we can do thi numer .
and todai an , a calcul on the internet can give it to you instantan .
you now have z of delta for the given delta , squar it , divid it by <num> epsilon squar , and that give you an estim of how big n ha to be .
we should promptli put in some number here to see how these term of error , confid , and sampl size is plai out .
so the requisit statist guarante is that the chanc of a deviat of epsilon or more should be small , should be no more than delta .
here now is a numer calcul .
so we start with , let's sai , epsilon run from <num> through <num> . <num> .
in other word , <num> , <num> , and <num> .
look at confid is requir of , sai , <num> , <num> , <num> .
promptli comput the quantil .
the z delta requir that the area under the curv to the right of , of , of z should be no more than delta over <num> .
a numer comput show that when a confid requisit is <num> , delta as . <num> , the associ quartil z , is about <num> , <num> .
more precis , around <num> . <num> truncat to two decim place .
and if the confid requir is more acut , sai , a <num> confid , we want more confid in the answer , then of cours the z is go to go larger becaus we want to a captur a smaller and smaller portion of the area to the right .
how larg ?
in fact , the quanitl correspond to a <num> confid is almost exactli <num> . <num> .
again , truncat to two decim place .
the penultim column show us the chebyshev estim , most all , from <num> to about <num> , <num> .
the last column tell us what the estim of the sampl size ar , for a normal approxim .
observ that there's almost a factor of <num> and <num> .
and if you look at the last row , where we want an error of <num> and a confid of <num> , thi is a sort of , a default that peopl will refer to .
we see that the sampl size estim ha drop from around <num> , <num> to just over <num> , <num> .
now , admittedli , we wave our hand fairli briskli here to get there .
we were appeal to a theorem which i did not prove to you .
and my defens here is that , well , thi is go to need more machineri .
okai .
but if we assum the result , then we've got at least as an approxim , an estim of a sampl size .
how doe the error of the approxim affect thi ?
is it a seriou error ?
and gener , the answer is no , not veri much .
it typic affect it in the second decim place , which mean that your sampl size estim don't chang by veri much .
for exampl , as a rule of thumb , a sampl size of about <num> , <num> will take care of all the error in the approxim , veri nice , thank you .
and get you an estim which is uniformli good for ani valu of p .
it will give you an error of no more than <num> with a confid of <num> .
i shall not try to make thi ani more precis at thi moment .
what i'm go to try to convei to you here is the follow .
that elementari method deal with independ variabl alreadi give us potent and power tool with deep and subtl applic in commonplac and import problem .
and so we shall be satisfi with a slogan .
we have seen thi slogan befor .
a rel small , honest random sampl .
what doe honesti mean ?
well , that it is actual independ drawn .
that there's no bia .
and small , well we've seen that for exampl , if we want a guarante of an error of no more than <num> , and a confid of <num> , someth like a littl more than <num> , <num> individu will suffic .
a rel small honest random sampl will give us good estim .
of an underli popul , and a sampl size is independ of the size of the underli popul .
it's the same whether the under , underli popul is ten of thousand , or million or billion .
and ultim , thi why poll realli work .
the normal approxim give us estim , which ar implement without an inordin cost and give rise to accur estim .
of cours the devil is in the detail and the next time you look at a poll in the newspap or a report on the new , you should cock a glanc at the fine print .
wa the sampl realli random ?
do we have reason to believ that it wa honest ?
and what wa the sampl size ?
the normal approxim to the binomi tell us that rel small sampl suffic .
someth like <num> , <num> would work for error of <num> and confid of <num> .
but we can't pare too much meat from thi bone .
if the number get too low , then our error blow up and our confid becom neglig .
so for exampl , a poll sai , reportedli give rise to accur estim and you look at the fine print and it sai , well we poll <num> individu .
well that poll is worth , well , the paper it wa written on .
discard it with thi is also the reason why drug test work .
ye , we're still go to need largish sampl , and it's go to be enorm expens to get it done right .
but the number ar still potenti manag .
and so we come to thi .
the normal approxim to the binomi give us apodict evid for why poll realli work , why drug test realli work .
the appar serendipit , accident discoveri of the bell curv by the de moivr in <num> wa to have deep and portent consequ .
as is the case of , of anywher typic in mathemat and in scienc , great and abid pathwai aris from veri small begin .
after de moivr's initi discoveri in <num> , it took <num> year befor the next develop .
befor pierr simon , marqui de laplac extend de moivr's analysi for a fair coin to bent coin .
and from the earli part of the 19th centuri onward , the develop proceed apac , and gather speed as the centuri move on .
by the end of the 19th centuri and by the earli part of the 20th centuri , it had becom appar that that appar accident discoveri of de moivr wa realli fundament .
that the bell curv aros everywher , and it wa not an accid .
thi led , ultim , to that basic principl and probabl perhap , the preemin principl and probabl , that is call the central limit theorem .
let me give you a version of the theorem and unapologet , without ani proof at thi point .
a version that is veri comprehens and alreadi take into account a larg applic domain .
so , to begin , we're go to start with a random sampl , as alwai .
it's an honest sampl .
we're think of repeat independ trial .
there's an underli distribut , which spit out number .
and we're go to draw independ from that distribut .
x is a gener exampl of an outcom of thi experi .
and we perform independ copi of x , x1 , x2 , x3 xn , and so forth .
a set of repeat independ trial .
suppos addition that the underli distribut , or chanc law , ha an expect , a probabilist center of mass , mu .
and a varianc , an expect squar deviat from the center of sigma squar .
start with thi , we promptli form a sequenc of partial sum .
sn as alwai now , is a sum of the first n xs .
now we want to look at thi as n becom larger and larger and larger .
we're go to look at the sequenc of partial sum sn .
and you should draw freeli from your experi with the binomi .
now the distribut of sn can be quit complex .
it's inherit from the underli distribut of the xs , but in gener , it's go to have a realli complex form .
there is no hope , in gener , to find a close form solut for what the chanc law of sn is go to look like .
but , if we look at it asymptot , as n becom larg , well then , we should look at it with a proper center and a proper scale .
our experi again with the binomi tell us that we should standard .
and for everi n , form a new variabl , sn , properli center at zero expect by subtract from sn , n time mu .
rememb , addit ride to the fore here .
that center the distribut at the origin , and then put in place a common scale by divid by the spread of the standard deviat of sn .
addit , again , tell us that varianc of sn is n time sigma squar .
so the standard deviat is the squar root of n time sigma .
we now have a standard variabl , properli center at the origin , and view at a proper scale .
we're now look at , if you like , a dimensionless variabl .
in the context of the binomi , we realiz that thi sn wa govern essenti by a normal distribut , essenti by the bell curv .
and remark , almost four centuri after de moivr , we find that thi is true quit gener .
the probabl that a , a properli center variabl , a sum variabl , view in the proper scale , li between ani given rang you choos , but you can sai an a and a b .
is given approxim by the area under the bell curv between a to b .
no matter what the underli distribut or chanc law wa .
thi is remark .
thi explain why the bell curv is so ubiquit , in theori and in applic .
sum ar endem in scienc , in engin , in mathemat , in sociolog .
and becaus sum ar so preval , if we have reason to believ that the perturb make up the summand ar independ , then we should expect that a suitabl center and scale version of a sum will behav like a normal law .
thi is remark .
thi theorem is perhap the central theorem , the most import and fundament theorem in all of chanc .
and we can onli get a glimmer of why it is so portent , why it is so weighti .
it appli in all kind of circumst , regardless of the underli start distribut .
thi theorem ha the role of an emin grise .
the grei emin a side refer to the cardin richelieu .
it inform , essenti , the entir theori .
and it's becaus of thi remark fact that the bell curv crop up again and again and again .
essenti , what were the underli chanc law ?
now , as the 20th centuri progress , thi result wa strengthen and further gener , and it continu to be gener todai into varieti of circumst .
set where the variabl ar drawn from , sai , differ chanc law , but ar still independ .
set where the variabl have valu in more than on dimens .
in other word , we're ad random vector .
set where the variabl ar not independ , but almost so .
set where there's onli a weak depend across the variabl .
the bell curv keep crop up again and again and again .
an understand of these circumst then lead to other limit law , where , for exampl , the variabl have depend , or perhap the variabl don't have varianc .
or some , perhap , where the variabl don't even have expect .
thi accident discoveri of de moivr from <num> had fruit far beyond what could've been ec , anticip at that time .
thi ha inform , essenti , all of modern probabl , and as we shall see , ha inform applic domain in a huge spread , a huge of palett of possibl .
of cours , the further we go along with these result , the more we try to tweak out of thi , the more it is clear that we're go to need mathemat dexter .
and so , ye , the later reach of thi kind of result ar prodigi difficult sometim .
thei requir a lot of mathemat background .
but at the end of it all , the result itself is startl in it simplic .
and perhap again , becaus we ar deal with a polit ag , a slogan to summar the essenti featur of thi mathemat result is appropri .
the sum of independ perturb follow a normal law .
summari of tableau <num> , the fabul limit law , part <num> .
the bell curv fit in , why poll realli work .
at the heart of our short lectur todai , wa the discoveri of the central limit theorem and the ubiquit natur of the bell curv .
the sum of independ motiv behav , essenti , as if it were govern by a normal law .
suitabl scent and skill , the probabl of a sum , line between in ani interv , sai , between a and b , is given approxim by the area under the bell curv in that interv .
thi remark theorem ha inform a host of applic all fuel by the idea that sum ar endem in scienc , and mathemat , and engin .
so we've alreadi seen some applic in plai in mathemat statist , start with poll , drug test , and more gener , in estim of mean .
the central limit theorem crop up in biologi , where as estim of height , weight , intellig , and so forth , ar frequent assum to have a normal character , a game presum becaus underli it is a sum of perturb which ar not quit control .
the normal law crop up in physic , black bodi radiat , if you're take a cours is thermodynam , for exampl .
it crop up in astronomi , in the cosmic background radiat , which is the ghostli after imag of the big bang .
it crop up in sociolog , where we have larg number of peopl mill around in their own independ fashion .
it crop up in engin , and the character of nois , nois in your televis set , nois in your film .
nois in satellit commun .
it crop up in econom and mathemat financ .
if you think about agent enrol in financ , as mani independ entiti , then , again , we have fertil ground here for a potenti bell curv to emerg .
it's a veri rich panopli of possibl .
thi is a good place to conclud .
let's take stock over what we've done in the last eight week .
we began with chanc experi , and tri to deduc what a mathemat framework for them should be and we came up , ultim with the idea of a sampl space of possibl outcom .
event as subset or aggreg of these sampl point and probabl measur as an addit set function which ascrib chanc to these limit .
build upon thi foundat , we discov how we could fold insid inform in the form of condit probabl , and happen then upon the fundament concept , that of independ .
independ is fundament a rule of product , and onc we have thi under our belt , we could immedi delv into applic of quit some heft and subtleti .
we came back to poll , and in poll we find that estim of popul ar independ sum .
the binomi distribut swam into view and the poisson distribut attach to it , and the character of these distribut led us ultim to the fabul limit law .
the law of larg number , at it part , is perhap the most intuit compon of the theori of probabl .
it sai someth about averag , for which we have a lot of intuit .
the law of larg number alreadi valid why poll work , why drop test work , but dig deeper in , we discov , against all odd , thi beauti , thi serendipit , thi marvel object , the bell curv , and thi give us , ultim , an ultim valid for why all these applic domain thrive , why the mathemat theori give you a firm foundat .
it is fit that we conclud , as we began , with the toss of a coin .
proof id , where doe a student go from here ?
if your object wa to get an understand of how chanc plai a role in life around us , to get more than a superfici understand , a , an understand which is principl , which is a fair mathemat foundat , then you have all that you need with just thi tweak .
as you've seen , you've got a broad panopli of applic that you can appli your understand to .
but of cours , there's much more to the theori that we can't cover in , in a short introductori exposur to the materi .
for those of you who want to dig further , well , there ar fertil field of in front of you , and i envi you that discoveri .
you'll discov the theori of measur and real analysi .
you will discov the theori of random process and you'll along the wai you'll discov wonder theorem and fabul applic .
have at it .
the british poet algernon swinburn wrote in <num> in hi poem the garden of proserpin , even the weariest river wind it's wai somewher safe to sai , and so it is for lectur and class even the most torpid lectur in a cours eventu do conclud , and so do we .
thi conclud the entre for a cours in probabl .
of cours we do have a littl more for those of you who wish to delv into it .
sai if you want a littl dessert as it were .
the last tableau , tableau <num> is a danger bend of tableau but the applic in it ar delici .
and if you're curiou about a rich addit set of applic , have at it .
otherwis , i bid you adieu .
the river of probabl is a gloriou river .
the tributari ar excit , exot , fragrant , and i've had a long career of delv into these .
i wish you the same good fortun .
so what ar the three element we have in in hand ?
first , there is an inescap error we ar go to make .
well , what do we call the error ?
we could make it on <num> , <num> .
well , natur , now if we want to us an algebra notat for it , let us call the error after the formid augustin loui cauchi who introduc hi notat in <num> .
let's call it epsilon , the greek letter .
of cours the epsilon is stand for e for error .
what about the confid ?
well , we can onli sai that we'll make an error no more than thi with a certain confid .
let us sai we call the confid on minu delta .
now what do i mean by thi ?
well , if i want a confid of , sai , <num> , then i want delta to be <num> .
if i want a confid of <num> , i want delta to be <num> .
so , here for exampl , ar sampl of what epsilon and delta could be .
so epsilon's <num> . <num> sai that i make an error of no more than <num> .
a confid of <num> sai that delta is <num> . <num> .
so thi pronounc will sai that i'd like to sai that i make an error of no more than <num> with a confid of <num> , or , in other word , i make an error or exceed <num> , the chanc of that happen is no more than <num> .
here ar other possibl for epsilon and delta .
for exampl , an error of <num> , epsilon is <num> . <num> .
a confid of <num> , delta is <num> . <num> .
or , yet again , an error of <num> and perhap a confid of <num> , epsilon is <num> . <num> , delta is <num> .
it would be wise not to make an absolut pronounc on what epsilon and delta should be ahead of the fact .
differ set need differ error toler and differ confid .
for exampl , a set involv , let's sai , the number of misplac letter by the postal servic requir a certain error of toler and a certain confid , right ?
perhap on cannot get awai with misplac more than , let's sai , <num> in <num> or <num> in <num> letter , all right ?
otherwis there might well be a revolt on the street , but if the set is , let's sai , that of space explor , then an error of <num> in <num> or <num> in <num> could be catastroph .
the moment on let a spacecraft go it is beyond our reach and we have a veri small toler for error , and so in those case an epsilon might need to be a veri tini , mayb on part in a million or even on part in a billion .
so the moral of the stori is that we should not restrict what epsilon and delta should be a priori .
we should let the problem inform us how much error is toler and what confid is desir .
the third element of cours in thi program is the amount of data avail , the sampl size n , and , of cours , these three quantiti ar ineluct link , and so here is a million dollar question .
if on is given , let us sai , a maximum error toler , epsilon , and a desir confid that the estim is within that error toler of sai , on minu delta .
for definit if the reader wish , she can think of epsilon as sai , <num> and delta as <num> , so we're talk about a , in no more than a <num> error with a confid of at least <num> .
what size of sampl will guarante these error and confid paramet ?
all right , let's set it up now mathemat becaus now we want to make quantifi progress at estim thi .
recal what do we want .
for the desir sampl size , n , we want the rel frequenc of success , sn divid by n to be ; on the on hand , no smaller than p minu epsilon and no larger than p plu epsilon .
for definit if p is <num> and epsilon is , sai , <num> , <num> , then i want my rel frequenc to be no smaller than <num> minu <num> , or <num> and no larger than <num> plu <num> or <num> .
so with thi in hand here is our desir relat .
the probabl the rate of frequenc of success li between p minu epsilon and p plu epsilon should exce on minu delta .
if so , what thi is sai is thi , if thi kind of guarante can be provid , let's sai epsilon is <num> for definit , let's sai that on minu delta is <num> , delta is <num> .
if we can proffer such a guarante ; then we ar sai that if we do the random experi and we gener what wa na's and gener the sampl of that size and gener the re , the rel frequenc of success , sn over n , then thi rel frequenc of success will be within <num> of the underli p , which is not known to us , but it'll estim p by no more than a <num> error , and thi'll happen , on averag , at least <num> of the time .
veri roughli speak , if <num> peopl did poll , each of them report a rel frequenc of success , on averag <num> of them will get answer within plu and minu <num> of the right answer , and of cours , unfortun , sadli , <num> of thi group , <num> of these <num> , on averag , will get answer out in left field .
thei have no idea where the answer could be .
thei could be veri bad , veri vagu , veri small .
we'll have no confid whatsoev in those answer .
of cours we'd like to know ahead of time whether a particular sampl is good or bad .
sadli , we cannot proffer ani absolut guarante .
we live in a chanc driven world .
bad thing happen to good peopl .
life happen , and so all we can sai is the follow , that if a random experi is perform then a larg percentag of them , sai <num> of such experi , will give good answer , but we have to live with the sad realiti that our particular experi might be bad .
but thi happen rare and we can take solac in that .
now , thi is an adequ statement of what we want , but let's try to compact it mathemat .
what thi is sai is that sn over n , the rel frequenc of success , differ from p by no more than epsilon , either on the neg or on the posit side , and therefor by the expedi of take absolut valu we can simpli thi express and write it down as the probabl that the absolut valu of the differ of the rel frequenc of success from the underli probabl p is no more than epsilon .
or yet again , if the rel frequenc of success differ from p by no more than epsilon with probabl on minu delta then the probabl of the obviou event , the compliment , should not exce delta , and so thi is equal to sai that the deviat of the rel frequenc of success , sn over n from p , an absolut valu , exce epsilon with a probabl no more than delta .
thi ha got , of cours , mani move part here .
there ar epsilon and there ar delta and there ar ns , but at least we have a compact express to look at .
now , let's take a look at thi and see what we can do with thi .
so here is our desiderat .
we ar given , a priori , an error toler epsilon .
we ar told that our estim should lie within that error toler with a confid of at least on minu delta .
here is a simpl mathemat condit to check , and now it is clear that in that equat is buri a relationship between the error , the confid , and the sampl size .
as i mention earlier , the error , the confid , and the sampl size form an intric waltz in thi process .
thei're intim connect and the heart of the connect is a mathemat relat which is buri in that relat .
thi is what we would like to extract .
we ar now readi to tackl the estim for the probabl frontal .
recal our basic question wa thi , if on is given an error toler epsilon and a confid that is desir of <num> minu delta .
what size of sampl as a function of the allow error epsilon and as a function of the confid paramet delta ?
what size of sampl will get us estim which ar within these error paramet with , within the desir confid ?
when on look at a mathemat equat like thi , well , at some level , it is a formid object .
and if on tri to deconstruct it , you sai , oh my god , i don't see how to make ani progress here .
now , sure we can make progress if we're inform what the error toler is , if you're told , sai , that epsilon is <num> .
and we're told what n is .
then we can simpli , for the probabl of the left , write down the event , and then sum up the binomi probabl , add numer , calcul what these probabl ar .
of cours , thi is alreadi within our purview and we've alreadi seen exampl of thi .
but thi is , at a deep level , not veri satisfactori .
what thi doesn't allow us to do is intuit what the relationship between n and these paramet , epsilon and delta , realli is .
all we have is a bunch of numer estim , which give us a feel that mayb thing ar okai , but we have no guarante .
to get we actual ar go to have to try to , at least in principl , analyt try to comput an som , an express for that probabl .
a huge step forward wa made by the great russian mathematician pafnuti chebyshev .
chebyshev wa born in <num> .
he live a long life .
di in <num> .
and in mani wai , we can find chebyhev's fingerprint all over modern mathemat .
in mani wai , you can think of chebyshev as a father of russian modern mathemat .
chebyshev made contribut in a plethora of disciplin .
he made deep contribut to the theori of number .
he made a , a fundament contribut to what is now call the prime number theorem that wa ultim resolv by hadamard and de la vall e poussin .
he made deep contribut to the theori of what is now call orthogon polynomi .
if a student is ever inspir to take a cours in fourier analysi or fourier theori , she will encount these wonder polynomi of chebyshev .
and these , incident , were inspir by chebyshev's interest in jame watt's steam engin .
and chebyshev made deep and fundament contribut to the theori of chanc .
hi student ar among the most note probabilist of the 20th centuri .
in <num> , he propos a subtl and seemingli trite look inequ for the kind of probabl we ar concern with .
and thi inequ turn out to be the kei .
now , to begin the stori , let me set it up by go back and review what the basic structur is .
so here's a quick review .
we're consid poll for definit , so there's an underli popul , which is a target .
we're go to sampl element independ from the entir popul .
and that sampl is go to be uniformli with respect to the popul , and the sampl is go to be with replac .
in other word , we're go to have a sequenc of bernoulli trial , let's sai a sampl of size n .
we're go to form an accumul number of success .
of cours , we call that s sub n .
and we now know that s sub n ha got a binomi distribut with paramet n and p .
and now we know what the mass function for s sub n is .
the atom probabl ar given by the binomi probabl .
and we know exactli what the gener shape of thi distribut look like now .
but we've done more , right ?
in tableau ten , in part on , we look at the idea of a center of mass .
a probabilist center of mass ar what we call the expect of thi distribut .
and we found that the expect ha got a veri simpl form .
it is center at the maximum probabl , n time p .
and we also comput a notion of spread in a probabilist moment of inertia , or in other word , the varianc .
the expect squar spread of the valu of the binomi around it expect valu is given by n time p time q .
now the last is all we will need to slung on through chebyhev's inequ .
so let me just extract that last equat .
what have we got from a formal point of view ?
if we , if we cut awai all the , the color , the context , we've got a mathemat ident .
if you sum , k run from <num> through n off a squar weight by a binomi probabl , you get n time p time q .
rememb q is <num> minu p .
thi is our start point .
so what did we want to estim ?
well , we want to estim a particular probabl .
and what is the probabl at hand ?
it is the probabl that someth bad happen .
what is bad in thi context ?
we ar given an error toler epsilon that we do not wish to exce .
and we want to know , what is the probabl that the rel frequenc of success is , s n over n , our estim for p .
differ from the true fix but sadli unknown p by more than epsilon .
let's promptli write it down in term of an event .
what is the event ?
well , let's clear the denomin by multipli all term by n .
and so , thi becom the probabl .
that an absolut valu , the accumul number of success , sn defer from np by more than n epsilon .
thi is a bad thing .
how do we go about comput it ?
well let , i think a pictur will help us , right ?
so let's draw a pictur of a typic binomi distribut .
the region around np , the center , up to n epsilon to the left and n epsilon to the right , is the good region .
that's the region where my estim is within epsilon of the true answer .
the region to the left of that and to the right of that shown red in the figur is a bad region .
all the integ k which land in those region give rise to bad result , so our event is all integ k to the left of the green region and to the right of the green region .
all right .
how do we comput thi probabl ?
well , we simpli add all the binomi probabl in that effect region .
and here's some notat .
thi notat look cumbrou and complex , right ?
we have a subscript which look messi and deep and thi is not the wai we usual write sum .
well what doe thi mean ?
thi mean that we're go to be ad binomi probabl .
and what kind of binomi probabl ?
rememb n , the number of trial , is fix .
p the sexist probabl is fix albeit unknown .
and so what we ar go to do is add over a number of success , k .
over what rang ?
well , the figur tell us in what look like the red region .
and what is the red region ?
all those integ k for which k differ from np in absolut valu by more than n epsilon .
and if we break it down into the two individu piec , thi mean that either k is smaller than np minu n epsilon or that k is larger than np plu n epsilon .
oh , here's where a neophyt or even a person with experi can spend a lot of time .
write out these binomi probabl , stare at them , attempt to massag them , and hope against hope that someth good will happen .
sadli , such effort ar doom to failur .
that sum is intract in the sens that there is no simpl close form for it .
we're go to have to take a differ tack .
here is a seemingli innocol idea which doesn't look veri promis .
of cours , there's go to be a method to the mad .
the binomi probabl of the sum .
if multipli by <num> , well it chang noth .
binomi probabl time <num> is just the self same binomi probabl .
noth ha happen , ha it ?
but here is the kei idea of checkoski .
if the term on insid the summat is replac by a number bigger than <num> .
then all we'll have done is increas the valu of the sum .
mm , i wonder if thi could be us .
well for it to be us we're go to have to replac <num> by someth creativ , someth which give us analyt simplif .
let us take a look at what the rang of valu k is over which i'm sum .
rememb i am sum over those integ k for which in absolut valu k np exce n epsilon .
if i divid both side by n epsilon .
then thi is complet equal to sai that the ratio of the absolut valu of k minu np to n epsilon is bigger than <num> .
so we've got a sum over all integ k for which that inequ is true .
or yet anoth wai of look at it , if i have a number , sai x , which is bigger than <num> .
then x time x is certainli also bigger than <num> .
x squar is bigger than <num> .
think of x as a fraction , absolut valu of k minu np divid by an epsilon .
the squar of thi number then is also bigger than <num> .
and so equival our summat is over all integ k for which k minu np the whole squar , divid by n squar epsilon squar is bigger than <num> .
everi term in that sum satisfi thi inequ .
if i replac <num> by k minu np that whole squar by m squar epsilon squar for k in that rang , then i can onli increas the valu of the sum .
and your immedi reaction is the man ha gone stark , stare bonker .
he start with a small express , and now he's made it bigger and wors .
how is thi in ani wai us ?
bear with me , we're go to make thing a littl wors befor we make it better .
okai .
i've now got an ugli express , admittedli true , okai ?
over a rang , the red rang schemat in your figur .
right , for the particular choic n equal to <num> and p equal to <num> .
now , the term i'm ad ar clearli all posit , right .
i've got a whole squar , which is a posit number and binomi probabl which by definit ar also posit .
so i'm ad posit quantiti .
if i add still more posit quantiti , i can onli make the sum bigger .
all right ?
i can keep make the inequ go the right direct .
well which term can i add ?
well what about all the miss term ?
those term near np which i've thrown awai .
if i includ those term schemat shown in the green area , then i've ad all valu k from <num> to n .
and then i'll get an even larger number .
and again , your reaction is , thi is get crazier and crazier .
how is thi actual go to lead anywher ?
but we're there .
take a look at the denomin .
we have n squar epsilon squar .
well , that doesn't depend upon k .
right , so we can pull it out of the sum .
so let's sai we pull it out of the sum .
the moment we do that , we've got <num> over n squar epsilon squar time the sum of a squar time a binomi probabl .
doe thi is ani wai look familiar ?
doe thi tickl an atavist memori ?
of cours it doe .
thi is exactli the calcul we did for the variant .
and if we look at the , at the ident , which we had discov by dint of so much effort in tableau ten part on , we find that that that entir sum is just n time p time q .
and , and probabl , thing have simplifi enorm .
cancel an n in the numer and the denomin .
recal that q is <num> minu p .
and we've got an eleg , simpl , unexpect formul .
the probabl that the rel frequenc of success deviat from p by as small an amount as epsilon or more , is no more than p time <num> minu p divid by n epsilon squar .
we should take a deep breath and savor thi .
we have no right to expect someth as eleg and so , so simpl and so beauti .
thi is magnific .
so go ahead , applaud yourself becaus thi is wonder .
all right .
now admittedli , thi is not an exact answer .
thi is true .
we , we now have an upper bound on the probabl .
that's okai .
and let's see what we can do with thi , okai .
on other concern might strike the listen .
we're try to estim the chanc that a sampl is bad .
what doe bad mean ?
that the rel frequenc of success deviat from p by as littl as epsilon .
it's nice to get an explicit bound on thi probabl , but the bound depend upon p .
and rememb , p is unknown .
so what us that ?
i've got a bound in term of an unknown paramet .
that doesn't help me , we don't seem to have made ani progress .
well not to hasti becaus it's a bit of an express , we should see if it's go to lead somewher els .
take a look at p time <num> minu p .
as p vari from <num> through <num> , with what you're given is a function of p .
and we can actual plot what p time <num> minu p would look like as p vari .
and if we did that , we find that we have thi beauti invert cup for the graph of the function .
of cours , a listen who ha done some calculu will realiz that realli i've got p time <num> minu p is a quadrat in p .
so i'm go to get a parabol shape and inde i do .
now , an examin of thi show that the largest valu for thi function occur when p is on half .
and at p equal to on half , the function take it maximum valu of on half time on half or on quarter .
of cours , thi is evid in the graph but if a listen realli wish to , she could write down a function f of p as p time <num> minu p .
take it deriv , set the deriv equal to <num> .
thei're the usual maxim process in the calculu .
and rediscov what you've seen in on fell swoop by just draw a pictur .
so here is a lesson .
the numer is not known to us , a priori .
it is in term of an unknown p .
but whatev it is , the numer is no more than on quarter for ani valu of p , and therefor we've got an even simpler part .
oh , thi is magnific .
let us take stock for just on moment befor we realli savor thi result .
notic on the left hand side , we have a probabl of a deviat of a rel frequenc from the unknown p .
on the right hand side , i've got an express involv onli n .
the sampl size , and the desir error toler epsilon .
p ha vanish .
poof !
it's gone .
we have a result which is uniform in p .
wow , thi is transcend and magnific .
now let us savor thi .
so let's summar the kei element .
we ar deal with a binomi distribut , that is what the sampl is go to give us , when we accumul success .
we ar interest in the probabl , of a bad event happen .
we're try to character , what fraction of sampl ar bad on averag .
so we're ask , what's the probabl , the rel frequenc of success differ from p by epsilon or more ?
and chebyshev tell us that for ani choic of p , and ani choic of epsilon , thi bad probabl is bound by the reciproc of 4n epsilon squar .
we could hardli ask for a simpler , cleaner , resolut of what appear to be a complet intract problem .
and within thi alreadi , we have the , at the heart of thi , alreadi a resolut of our basic problem , that of quantifi the efficaci of poll .
but befor we do that , befor we jump ahead , alreadi the bound on the right hand side is go to be us .
clearli you see a bound would not be us , if i had a bound for a probabl which is <num> .
how is that help ?
everi probabl is less than <num> .
such a bound , an upper bound will onli be us if it is small , becaus then that tell us the probabl is forc to be small , it's sandwich between <num> , the littl bound and whatev the upper bound is .
and if the upper bound is small , then the probabl is forc to be tini .
okai , so thi is the kei .
but if epsilon is small , then we see you have epsilon squar in the denomin .
right ?
so if you want a smaller toler , well <num> over epsilon squar is go to be a big number , no matter , howev small epsilon is , fix it .
that is your desir error toler , sai <num> .
sai half of <num> , it doesn't matter , fix your epsilon .
the moment you fix it , now choos a sampl size big enough , as n becom bigger and bigger and bigger , eventu , the quantiti on the right , becom as small as you desir .
thi is a qualif of what is now call the law of larg number .
thi is the fundament , origin , limit law of probabl .
the law which put our intuit on a firm theoret basi .
thi is why poll work .
the probabl that the rel frequenc of success is sn over n deviat from it expect valu p , which is fix but unknown .
but even a tini , infinitesim amount tend to <num> , as the sampl size get larger and larger and larger .
now , as i told you , thi is go to actual give us a quantifi prescript .
so chebyshev's inequ doe a littl bit more , it flush out the rate , at which these probabl becom small , and that's go to give us a number .
but befor i jump there , i should tell you a littl bit about the valu of such a bound process .
you see the valu of chebyshev's inequ is not that it is precis , no it is not .
okai .
you can get much better total result , which ar closer to the desir probabl .
the valu li in it extrem simplic .
few result in mathemat or in the human experi have stai so relev for so long .
thi inequ ha leg , it ha endur , and the primari reason for it , it last valu is it essenti simplic .
onli experi will convinc the listen , that simpl , eleg result is like thi , where in on swoop , on glanc , we can captur the essenti featur of the problem .
such result ar worth much , much more than ponder , condit bound mathemat result which take page to describ .
thi result is perhap , the prime exampl of the veriti of simplic .
the kei idea of chebyshev wa in hi recognit of the import of a squar , and out of that , almost magic come thi beauti and eleg result .
so our next step then , is to sai , what doe thi portend for the efficaci of a poem ?
and , we will turn to thi next .
chebyshev's inequ wa to have a veri deep consequ right across the theori but it immedi provid us a vehicl to analyz and understand why poll realli work .
so , let us begin with a quick recapitul of what the essenc of a poll is .
we imagin an underli popul which ha individu of two type , on or zero , republican or democrat .
these subpopul appear in a proport p and a proport q that ar a priori unknown to us .
we wish to understand what the distribut of these proport is , in other word , we'd like to estim p and q .
to thi end , we start by sampl randomli , independ , without bia , from the entir popul .
recal that sampl is , at least nomin , with replac .
and we gener , we engend a random sampl of size n .
x1 through xn .
correspond to bernoulli trial with a fix but unknown probabl , p , and natur we immedi form an accumul sum of success in the sampl , and thi is what we call s sub n .
of cours , s sub n is equip with a binomi distribut with two paramet .
a number of trial n , the number of time we've toss thi metaphor coin and the bia paramet p repres the sub popul proport that we ar interest in estim .
bear in mind that onc we gener a sampl , we know n .
of cours , thi is the number of data point we have accumul .
but we do not know p .
we have been led to believ that the estim of the rel frequenc of success in the sampl , s sub n divid by n , is inde a good estim of the underli popul proport p .
how good is it ?
so , here's a stage where we first realiz that it's a chanc experi , so certainti is go to be elus .
we ar go to per forc compel to make error .
but we would like to control the size of the error .
it's a chanc experi , therefor we can't have certainti , so we're go to have to sai thing with a certain amount of confid .
and so the error we make , the confid with which we make a pronounc .
and the sampl size , ar intim connect .
what is the desir item that our estim of p , in other word a rel frequenc of success sn over n , deviat from the fix underli sub popul proport p .
but even a small amount , epsilon the error told us .
thi probabl should not exce a number , delta , where <num> minu delta is a confid we wish to have .
for definit , we could think of , sai , epsilon as a small number , sai <num> .
delta is anoth small number , sai <num> .
so we want no more than a <num> error with a confid of <num> .
it's a veri simpl , beauti , eleg equat .
and it estim is facilit by chebyshev's inequ .
the probabl at hand is bound about by the reciproc of <num> time the sampl size n time the squar of the error paramet epsilon .
and so it suffic if thi bound is no more than delta .
and so , we have a slogan .
if the sampl size exce the reciproc of <num> epsilon squar delta , then we can assert that a estim of the underli popul proport , p , ha made an error which is no larger than epsilon with the confid of at least <num> minu delta .
some numer estim will add flesh and color to these bare mathemat bone .
so , let's go ahead and properli plug in some number .
suppos we look at a situat where we ar permit to make no more than sai a <num> error .
and we want a confid of at least <num> in our pronounc .
we plug in epsilon is point <num> , delta is point <num> .
and we observ that a sampl size that is requisit is <num> .
what if we want a tighter error toler , sai <num> ?
epsilon is <num> . <num> , and sai we want a tighter confid , we want a confid in our pronounc that of at least <num> .
in other word , delta is also <num> .
plug in epsilon and delta , both be <num> . <num> , and we find that a sampl size of <num> , <num> suffic to guarante an error of no more than <num> with a confid of at least <num> .
and if we get a littl greedier still .
an error of <num> and a confid of <num> , epsilon is <num> . <num> , delta is <num> . <num> and now we find that a sampl size a littl in excess of <num> , <num> will suffic to give us a veri friendli small area of no more than <num> .
with a high confid of at least <num> .
there ar some thing that ar worth take stock here .
observ that our sampl size estim for a desir error toler and for a desir confid , our sampl size estim nowher contain within it .
thi high of the underli popul .
it is independ of how a small or larg the underli popul is .
it make no matter whether we ar deal with a popul of <num> , <num> , a <num> , <num> , a million , <num> million or a billion .
whatev the size of the underli popul , if it is dichotom and contain sub popul of two speci , two type , two charact , two color .
a fix sampl of size about <num> , <num> will estim the rel size of these sub popul .
with an error of no more than <num> and a confid in excess of <num> .
thi is magic .
and of cours we should promptli encapsul it in these polit dai via a slogan .
so here is our slogan .
a rel small , honest , random sampl .
what doe honesti mean here ?
that in fact the sampl is independ and that it is unbias .
a rel small sampl of the order of a few thousand , whose size doe not depend upon the underli size of the popul or upon what the particular mix of sub popul is , what p is .
so a sampl size independ of these paramet give a veri good estim of the underli sub popul proport .
thi is magic of a high order .
and thi is why poll work .
on the face of it , thei have no busi work .
a sampl of a size a few thousand doesn't seem reason that it would contain within it , within it the sentiment of a veri larg underli popul , but it doe .
and at the heart of all of thi is the inequ of chebyshev .
poll ar endem in modern life .
pollster seek our opinion on anyth and everyth .
our opinion on toothpast , on the newest video game , on the new movi , on a film star .
and especi in polit .
there is perhap no other place where poll and opinion get so fraught with emot .
and for the reason's i've just given you , rel small poll can give us accur result with high confid .
except when thei don't .
a case in point , appar , wa the bitterli contest presidenti elect of the year <num> .
the protagonist were the republican georg w bush and the democrat al gore .
the peculiar of the u . s .
presidenti elect system meant that state were allot to presidenti candid on a winner take all basi .
so whoever won the popular vote in , sai , florida would then win the state of florida .
the elect wa veri close , and everyth then hing upon which of the two candid won the state of florida .
as the vote were count , poll were be report in real time on the tv network .
now , why bother report the poll ?
sai , after all , within a dai we were go to know the result .
but we ar an impati race , we'd like to know the answer befor the answer's actual provid to us .
and so , pollster camp outsid elect booth and queri peopl who vote .
who did you vote for ?
you now have a captiv audienc , you see , peopl have vote , thei're come out of the poll booth , and so it's veri easi to ask them question .
so , these ar call exit poll and you can veri quickli engend a larg amount of data , much more than the small number us chebyshev's inequ .
by <num> pm that even , the network had call florida for the democrat candid , al gore , and therefor , the presid .
but by midnight , doubt were creep in , into their pronounc .
and by <num> pm , thei had revers cours and said , oh , no , no .
the florida , the state of florida is actual won by georg w bush .
and therefor , the presid now is go to go to georg w bush .
rememb , thi wa actual the pivot state .
thi battleground wa go to determin who won the elect .
now , what could possibl go wrong ?
have i been tell you a big fib ?
by <num> pm alreadi , million of vote had been count .
not on or <num> , <num> or <num> , <num> , but million .
and i've alreadi told you a small sampl should give us good estim of the proport .
which proport of the populist is go to go to georg w bush and what proport of the vote is go to go to al gore ?
we should alreadi have extraordinari good estim .
and yet , appar , it wa not enough .
by <num> pm , million of the vote had been count and the elect had swung the other direct .
and by earli morn , the network had left the field in disarrai .
thei said we don't know who won .
and by thi time , almost all the vote have been count .
someth seem to have gone badli wrong .
wa it with the mathemat or wa there someth els go on ?
to come to right understand we're go to have to dig into a littl bit of the detail of what wa seen unfold in that year .
so , in that year , the number of vote that were cast in florida wa veri close to <num> million .
it turn out to be a veri tight elect .
ye now , the number i want to show you have been debat in mani quarter .
mani differ count have been provid with differ number .
but what all the protagonist have agre , is that which a wai these vote were count , the differ between the few , the candid wa of the order of a few hundr vote .
here is on such offici count .
mr .
bush got veri close to <num> million vote .
mr .
gore got veri close to <num> million vote .
as a proport of the vote popul then , each of them receiv veri close to <num> of the vote that were cast .
if for the number i've given you mr .
bush obtain just slightli more than <num> .
a smidgen more than <num> of the vote .
mr .
gore , a smidgen less than <num> of the vote .
now to get a feel for the complic that thi caus , let's take a look at a slightli more sanit exampl where two candid ar separ by <num> of the vote .
sai on candid get <num> or so , more precis , <num> of the vote .
and the other candid , <num> of the vote .
now , recal that in the process of poll , we ar go to make error .
the more the data we have , the smaller the error we can guarante .
but take a look at a consequ of even a small error , let's sai an error of <num> in estim a p .
and therefor also in estim a q .
if p , <num> in thi exampl is off by <num> , sai it is on the low side .
then what happen ?
well the <num> becom <num> , and therefor the q , which wa origin <num> now increas by <num> , and now becom <num> .
the role of the candid have now revers .
the candid two who's lead becaus of a slight error in the estim is now the candid who's follow .
and abruptli our entir percept of we , who win and who lose is now upsid down .
it's now clear what we need in our estim .
you see , the idea here is not just estim a proport , but estim a rel proport .
not just estim p or q , but estim a differ between them .
we need an error , which is no more than half the separ between p and q .
so that in the worst case , p can't edg more than half the distanc toward q .
and q can't edg more than half the distanc toward p , keep the rel order unchang .
and therefor , for a gener valu for p and q , we need an error no more than on half of the absolut valu of the differ between p and q .
whether p is bigger than q or q is bigger than p make littl matter .
thei just revers the role of the protagonist .
you want the error to be no more than half the separ .
and in our exampl with both p and q bobbl just around <num> , whatev the , the , the count we actual adopt .
it turn out , the error epsilon we need is about , someth like two part in <num> , <num> .
well , thi is remark .
thi is realli , realli , realli small .
with such a small epsilon , if you sai we want a confid in our poll of <num> .
recal the sampl size by the chebyshev estim increas like the reciproc of <num> time the squar of the error time the confid paramet .
you plug in these number and we find that the requisit sampl size for thi tini area and with a confid of sai , <num> is in excess of <num> billion .
paus and look at thi again .
a sampl size in excess of <num> billion to captur what <num> million peopl said .
thi is absurd .
rememb sampl ideal is go to be with replac from the entir vote popul .
thi is go to sai that everi member who vote in florida should be queri in averag <num> time ask the same question each time .
who won the elect ?
and if you did that , and if thei didn't get mad at you and throw you out , you would actual get a beauti precis answer .
and you'd be abl to separ mr .
bush and mr .
gore .
but of cours that is absurd statement .
poll break when you need such accuraci .
now , in such set of cours , the natur thing to do is to sai well , poll ar useless let throw it out the window , just count everybodi .
well , that , that's exactli what the elect doe doesn't it ?
but we actual now run into a differ problem .
i allud earlier to the fact that there have been multipl count , and that the count all gave slightli differ answer .
and the reason is , that ani count procedur rather it's human in thi case as it wa in florida in <num> , or even if it's a machin aid count .
for exampl , a mechan process or an optic electron process .
ani count methodolog introduc an error flaw which is ineluct which is there as a consequ of natur .
life happen .
the error flaw is typic of the order of a few hundr in the order of million .
and so , for an elect of thi close a magnitud , no amount of count is like to have made much differ .
the answer ar go to have , be wobbl around back and forth , depend upon which wai the count error took us .
in such situat , the idea of an abstract truth is unachiev .
the idea of who actual realli won the elect is forev .
not achiev .
we'll hit an ineluct arrow flow .
perhap , the onli thing that on could do at thi point is actual , thi is not what happen , of cours .
is to run the elect all over again and hope that enough peopl chang their mind .
that , the differ between the candid becom more than a few hundr .
so , here now is a refin slogan .
it is certainli true that a small , honest , random sampl give us veri good estim with high confid irrespect of the size of the underli popul or their predisposit .
but if on want more than good accuraci , if on want extraordinari accuraci , if on want incred high precis , then random sampl and poll becom unten .
we're go to have to count the entir popul and try to keep the error under control .
tableau <num> .
a potpourri of titil applic .
and so , we ar come to the end of our repast .
but , even the most fill of meal deserv a delic dessert , and so i'm go to give you a dessert of provok , titil , curiou applic .
thi is a danger bend lectur , and so thi tableau is intend for those who have the fortitud to brave perhap other danger bend tableaux .
the mathemat content here is not excess .
i will hide much of the detail .
but the applic you might well find ar persuas and tempt , and so thi is option .
and for those who want to indulg in thi dessert , carri on .
we shall see an applic in the art of make monei in optim stock portfolio select .
we shall discuss the curiou case of sir cyril burt , psychologist .
and we will conclud with what wa appar a serendipit discoveri in the theori of rare event , lead to a beauti and ubiquit probabilist siev .
befor we start with our applic , let us recapitul the kei idea behind the fabul limit law which were the crown point of our develop .
the limit law in essenc describ typic behavior .
thi wa engend by sum of independ variabl .
and it led to a notion of central , a notion of concentr .
thi is what typic happen .
and we've seen how the behavior around that typic center wa govern , loos speak , by a bell curv , a normal distribut .
but along the wai , we also made a serendipit discoveri in the theori of rare event .
and thi wa in tableau ten , part two where we saw that the binomi distribut in the context of rare success devolv into a beauti approxim , the poisson approxim .
that look serendipit .
it look accident .
it handl rariti .
but thi accident discoveri fuel an entir theori of exceed and rare event , and thi is govern by the poisson distribut .
so our discoveri todai our direct in todai's lectur will be in two portion .
on on hand , we'll consid typic and two beauti and subtl applic where concentr , the law of larg number , and the central limit theorem come into plai .
and we look at a bevi of applic at the other end of the spectrum , where thing ar atyp , where thing ar rare , and now we will find that the poisson distribut come into plai .
and in the context of a beauti , remark , ubiquit , probabilist siev .
befor we do an analysi right , let me indulg myself by look at certain violat of the rule of engag and thi wa beautifulli articul by t . w .
korner at oxford univers .
that wa sloppi .
thi is i think unargu at least in thi paper , okai ?
and how wa he sloppi ?
well he's violat certain fundament rule .
the first fundament rule is to provid detail of your experiment procedur .
todai if a scientist goe into a lab , she will take a lab notebook and will jot down everyth , all the detail of the procedur .
why ?
so that a reader evalu the result can judg for herself the reliabl of the data collect and whether it is reproduc .
of cours , thi reproduc is at the heart of scientif investig .
and if on doesn't provid detail of how experi were done , then of cours , noth is reproduc .
so , clearli thi wa sloppi .
second , accord to korner , on should endeavor to alwai present unvarnish data .
just the fact ma'am , noth els .
why ?
so that the reader can judg for herself whether the analysi wa sound , can in fact do the analysi for herself as a saniti check to what is actual report by the investig .
three , there ar sometim good and necessari reason to massag data , to process it .
for exampl , there might be known case of outlier wai out there which distort the rest of the data .
those ar experiment aberr .
and so it might make all kind of thing to elimin , eschew , cut out , expurg , these strai , extran observ .
but if that is done or the data ar massag in ani other wai , then it is incumb upon the investig to provid the detail of what is done .
explain the mechan .
and , present thi side by side with the origin data .
so that again , the reader can make up her own mind as to whether the process , the mechan of massag the data , wa sound .
whether thi wa appropri .
and final , can i suggest an aphor which here also rilei point out , is perhap beyond the moral strength of most of us .
and which is to wit , do not conceal the weak of your own argument and do not ignor strong point over oppos point of view .
i will get to the analysi veri , veri briefli , but i can't resist as korner did , with a veri small , histor digress , right ?
korner point out that on reason that darwin wa so persuas is that a read of the origin of speci bring to the fore a quit remark transpar honesti .
it is veri rare that a scientist goe out of hi wai , almost to point out weak in hi theori .
thi wa a man who collect data over hi life .
and thi wa hi life work , the origin of speci .
and in a read of it you find that he point out difficulti with the theori , place where the theori can break .
for exampl , the theori of evolut requir extraordinari long time scale , on the order of hundr actual , thousand of million of year , billion of year .
but thi ran counter to a histor tradit which had imagin that the earth wa veri young in histor term , a few thousand year .
more blow were dealt to , to darwin's theori , even from scienc , from thermodynam .
earli calcul base on a , an inert cool bodi due to , to lord kelvin .
surg to the earth wa perhap no more than <num> million year , or in a refin of their , calcul perhap no more than <num> million year old .
and darwin point out that wa much too littl for hi theori .
he wa almost will to abandon the theori if that were true .
you just imagin , the , the intestin fortitud , the honesti requir to be abl to walk awai from a life's work at need .
and other area where the theori had potenti hole wa that a hereditari mechan wa pre suppos base upon the data that organ pass on featur to their progeni .
but darwin had no clue what the mechan wa .
he posit the exist of a mysteri mechan without know what it could be .
and in mani wai , as the centuri progress on into the 20th centuri and beyond , and more and more data were accumul , and more and more of these question that darwin rais were answer .
the ag of the earth wa answer by the discoveri of radioact emiss , a new sourc of energi which push back the ag of the earth back to between four and five billion year , more than enough for darwinian evolut .
the discoveri that hereditari mechan were encod in our genet structur came much later .
and all of these lead triumphant valid to thi most gloriou of theori .
there is perhap no other scientif theori which ha had so much experi of valid .
here is an autobiograph quot from darwin that i cannot resist give you .
and , i'm go to read it to you .
he said , i had dure mani year follow a golden rule , name that whenev a publish fact , a new observ or thought came across me which wa oppos to my gener result , to make a memorandum of it without fail and at onc .
for i had found my experi that such fact and thought were far more apt to escap from memori than favor on .
and it is perhap thi transpar of thought , thi transpar honesti which ha ultim led to such a strong persuas accept of the darwinian theori of natur select .
but we ar digress .
let's go back to the question of sir robert and now let's take a look at the data .
ye , thei were sloppili present but that doe not mean that fraud wa commit .
let us see what mathemat can tell us on thi score .
it is now time to actual do an analysi , and we're go to find that a bell curv is go to emerg majest from these ruin , right ?
now , keep in mind william feller's exhort , even strong faith must be fortifi by a statist test .
so we're go to try to come up with a principl mechan to be abl to analyz data like that present .
so let's go back .
here ar burt's two tabl on intellig from hi <num> paper .
the first tabl , the iq of adult .
the second tabl , the iq of their children .
what is the principl path forward ?
now , there ar mani kind of test on could imagin do in thi set .
but let's focu on on where we look at the total in the last row of each tabl .
the total tell us someth about the number of individu test in variou iq bin from , sai , <num> all the wai up through <num> .
yeah .
the data themselv ar scatter all over the place .
but a cursori look at the last row show that there is a quit beauti coher of these number .
the law of larg number appear to be work beautifulli in our favor .
so , let me now show you a histogram plot of the last two row , the total for the iq for the adult and for their children .
now , in the interest of explain the mechan for you , rememb we're deal with a nomin size of <num> , <num> , though perhap it's actual realli <num> , <num> , but it's been standard to <num> , <num> .
and what i'm go to do and show you in thi histogram tabl is to collect all the iq bin to the left of <num> , pool them togeth , and collect all the iq bin to the right of <num> and pool them togeth .
the motiv , of cours , is that as you go down into veri small iq or veri larg iq , that we have veri few repres .
and it is well known that the veri small probabl occurr have much , much worst confid .
but of cours , thi is in the interest of full disclosur , and the listen should judg for herself whether thi is a reason procedur .
t . w .
colonel ha provid a veri readabl account of thi entir saga , ha point out that on of the review of hi book said that thi wa a subject statist fudg .
but of cours , the reader should make up her own mind as to whether thi wa a reason procedur .
so what i've now done is collect the total in the iq for adult and children for you in variou bin .
the bin ar iq to the left of <num> , and then <num> to <num> , <num> to <num> , <num> to <num> , and so on , <num> to <num> , and final , a last or eighth bin from <num> onward all accumul togeth .
now look at the pictur .
thi is veri persuas .
the data themselv for adult and children were spread out .
there were certain thing you could gleam from just the tabl of data itself .
but the execut summari , the total , show a quit remark coher .
these number seem to march beautifulli in lockstep .
and we also see the emerg of a bell curv .
it look like thi kind of data ar beautifulli explic by a bell curv , a normal distribut .
rememb , the data wa standard , center at , at <num> with a spread or a standard deviat of <num> .
so , to understand or compar it with a statist posit gener mechan , which is normal , we start with a hypothet normal distribut , a normal densiti whose mean is exactli <num> , whose standard deviat is <num> , or equival , whose varianc is <num> squar or <num> .
here is a posit normal distribut of iq .
mani biolog process have been posit to have normal approxim , in part becaus presum of an idea that these process , like height , weight , intellig and other thing , perhap could be thought of as be aggreg of veri larg number of independ perturb .
and then we wave our hand briskli and make a vagu appeal to our central limit theorem , and voila , a normal densiti emerg .
howsoev it mai be , here is a presuppos distribut which is provid as a potenti explan for the mechan by which the data were gener .
now , what ar the data ?
well , we ar sampl at random from thi distribut .
in other word , we creat a random sampl .
of what size ?
well , natur n , though here , the nomin n we have in mind is n is a <num> , <num> .
but bear in mind that the actual number report there's some uncertainti in that score .
so thi could actual be <num> time <num> , <num> , or <num> , <num> , or some number in between .
so , ani some gener number , nomin <num> , <num> in our applic .
we're go to gener a random sampl honestli , transpar by independ sampl from thi bell curv with the mean <num> , varianc <num> .
now , onc you have a sampl like that , what ar we go to do with it ?
well , thei ar think of iq here as be measur on a continuum scale , but of cours , when we report it , we bin the iq into bin , tradition in bin of size ten .
so let's break up the iq scale into bin , accumul all the bin to the left of <num> , and systemat put the other bin togeth , ten at a time .
and now , we have eight bin of iq .
now , here's what we do .
look at each element of the sampl , x1 , x2 through xn .
each of these valu purportedli repres an iq of a gener individu .
that iq is go to fall into on of these eight bin .
accumul the number of element in the sampl , which were in the first bin .
these were all the individu in the sampl whose iq wa less than a <num> .
accumul all the element in the sampl which fell in the second bin .
these were the individu in the sampl whose iq fell between <num> and <num> , <num> and <num> , and so forth .
in other word , we bin the sampl .
of cours , if when you do thi , right , when you talk about accumul number , we , our natur notat is to us s sub n .
our notat is go to get a littl cumbrou becaus now we have not on ident to take care of , for exampl , the number of success , we ar actual eight bin .
let's keep n as a subscript , s for the number , and let's us as a superscript an identifi , <num> , <num> , <num> , up till <num> , which target the bin that we're talk about .
so , sn1 repres the number of outcom in that random sampl of size n which fell in bin on , iq is less than <num> .
sn2 , the number of outcom in that random sampl which fell into the second bin , in iq between <num> and <num> , and so on down .
with sn8 , all the outcom in the accumul bin from <num> on to the right .
okai , modestli more complex notat , but not grievous so , i hope , right ?
s sub n , we're familiar with .
it's an accumul sum , a total .
and the superscript tell us which bin we ar talk about .
so snk repres the number of element in the sampl which fell into the kth iq bin .
let's promptli gener these number , and i'm go to show you a particular sampl that i gener with n equal to <num> , <num> .
so we have the adult iq number , the children's iq number next to them .
and flank them as a third column , a third bar , the number of element in a random sampl of <num> , <num> from a normal densiti with mean <num> and varianc <num> , the number in each of the eight bin , sn1 , sn2 , through sn8 .
of cours , the sum of these sn's is exactli <num> , <num> .
there ar <num> , <num> element in the sampl distribut in these number in the eight bin .
again , i look at thi .
it show that there is a quit remark consist between these number that i actual obtain in on particular sampl that i gener , and the number provid by burt's in these tabl .
and thei all look like there's a veri good potenti for a normal fit .
the bar to the right is from a normal distribut .
the other two bar ar potenti from a project normal distribut , but that is what we're test .
if anyth , the data i gener appear to be a littl bit more variabl .
the data that burt provid appear to be much more convinc , but thei ar all veri close .
and thei all seem to have a reason , normal fit .
so , here's a question now .
to do an analysi , in the count of the number of element in the sampl in each bin , of cours , these ar chart driven , how ar thei distribut ?
so now , let's take stock again .
let's go back to our pictur .
do that , we ar deal with a hypothet normal distribut of iq with a mean <num> , varianc <num> , or equival , standard deviat is <num> .
we ar go to gener a random sampl by independ sampl from thi distribut , and we ar go to put the sampl into eight bin of iq .
what is the chanc that a given element in the sampl fall into the first bin ?
what is the chanc it fall into the second bin ?
what is the chanc it fall into the third bin , and so on ?
well , the probabl that a number drawn at random from thi normal densiti fall in a given bin is , by our usual procedur , the area under the curv of the densiti for that bin .
and now all you've got to do is a simpl numer comput , which ani internet calcul will do for you , for what these area ar .
and i'm go to give you a tabul of these area .
so thi is a numer estim of the area under the curv in each of these eight bin .
rememb , we have eight iq bin .
bin on is iq less than <num> , bin eight is iq bigger than <num> .
the other bin ar iq bin of width ten .
a typic iq bin , let's sai , is j .
j run from on through eight .
what ar the chanc that a random sampl member fall in bin j ?
natur , let's call it littl p sub j .
and the number littl p sub j ar clearli symmetr around the center .
and thei increas from <num> . <num> , truncat to four decim place , all the wai up to <num> . <num> , and then decreas symmetr on the other side .
now , with thi in place , what can we sai about the distribut of the number of element in each of these eight bin ?
now let's take a look at the fist bin .
you got a sampl , and a certain number fall into the first bin .
the chanc of fall into the first bin is p1 .
we have repeat independ trial in the sampl .
and each sampl member independ ha a chanc , p1 , of fall into the first bin .
the number that fall into the first bin , natur , is the accumul sum of these trial .
think of a trial as have a success if it fall in the first bin , success probabl is p1 , failur if it fall in ani of the other bin .
the accumul number of success in our old notat is sn1 .
and now we see that it must be a binomi distribut correspond to n trial with a success probabl of p1 .
likewis , how mani fall into the second bin ?
well , each trial ha got a chanc p2 of fall into the second bin .
there ar n independ trial .
sn2 is binomi distribut with paramet n and probabl of success or bia , p2 .
and likewis , all the other snk fall into place .
each of these is binomi distribut correspond to n trial with vari success probabl base upon the area under that normal curv .
rememb the marvel theorem , laplac's theorem , a central limit theorem beckon .
a normal law beckon for these sum .
and the normal law ar go to be center where ?
well , sn1 ha expect n time p1 .
sn2 ha expect n time p2 , and so on .
let's take a look onc more at the histogram of valu , thi time with a fourth column , the expect valu for these number snj .
the expect valu of sn1 is np1 , expect valu of sn2 is np2 , and so on .
and again , we see a quit remark concord of these valu .
the valu report ar accumul near their expect valu .
there seem to be a concentr , a drift in that direct , the law of larg number , the central limit theorem .
our question now is , well , how do these valu actual compar with what we expect ?
can we quantifi thi ?
thi will be the basi of a principl statist test .
so now we have come to it .
we ar now readi to construct a principl statist test of the bona fide of burt's iq data .
what is the kei principl ?
we've seen thi befor .
the idea is to compar the actual data with the result of a given duncan probabl experi .
a thought experi .
and ask ar the data repres of the experi ?
ar thei aberr with respect to that conceiv thought experi ?
we've seen thi befor in the analysi of the hot hand phenomenon .
we've seen thi in drug test .
we've seen thi in the context of pole .
it's the same idea for a principl statist test .
so we ar go to compar burt's report iq data , for adult and children , with what on would obtain , thi is a thought experi , from a random sampl gener from a normal distribut center at <num> with a spread of <num> or a varianc of <num> .
to remind you of the set , here is thi project random sampl .
a sampl of size n drawn from the distribut , with the sampl put into eight iq bin .
and the number of element in each iq bin will then be binomi distribut with paramet n and a coin bia probabl p , which depend upon the bin .
p1 , p2 , p3 , to p8 .
okai , now we're arm .
we now know the principl .
we know the underli statist and the probabl distribut .
and now all that remain is the execut .
well , there's still a step to be made .
what is our kei observ again ?
rememb that each of the valu sn1 through sn8 , a gener valu snk for bin k , will take valu via the , the law of larg number .
near the expect n time p of k .
and , if we view thi properli , by center and in the proper scale , then these valu s and k will behav normal .
like a bell curv , around the expect .
thi is the kei idea .
and so , what is our statist test ?
well , we want to compar the valu snk with n time pk .
what should such a test do ?
well , if we onli have on bin , it is easi .
thi is exactli the context of pole , and we know exactli how to do thi test .
but now we have eight bin .
how do we read thi riddl ?
what do we do now ?
do we do them on at a time for each of the bin ?
that is sure possibl .
but we're go to run into a difficulti , a subtl difficulti here .
and that is , bear in mind , that everi time we do an estim , we incur a statist error and have to suffer a certain confid .
the confid albeit could be high , sai <num> or <num> .
but , when you do multipl test , each of them at a rel high confid , collect , the confid leak and we have much lower confid in the whole .
at least on of them might turn out to be bad .
so , do them on at a time is the reason thing to try to do , but ha a subtl reason warn against it .
so we need a new test .
i'm go to go back to two maxim suggest by t . w .
korner , which seem veri appropri for the set .
first , whatev the test we develop , it should be easi to appli .
comput complex reduct is sure to be wish .
we ar follow along with the dictat of william of ockham .
you rememb ?
the 13th centuri franciscan philosoph and monk , who opin that we should find simpl explan for data whenev possibl , eschew complex if it were not need .
of cours , we recogn that thi is the cornerston of all modern scienc .
so we want a computation simpl test .
two , we want the test to be fair .
it should fairli treat all the data in fair and just proport .
so , thu for exampl , a test which onli test the last iq bin and ignor the other would be unfair .
it weight everyth down to on compon .
we want to check all the iq bin fairli and evenli .
so , here ar two desiderata .
how should we construct such a test ?
so let's begin .
what do we anticip from sn1 , the number of element in the sampl in the first iq bin ?
we anticip that it should be close to n time p1 .
what about sn2 , the number of element in the sampl in the second iq bit ?
we anticip it should be close to n time p2 , and so on .
and so it becom natur to posit a test where we look at the differ , or the distanc from each sn valu to it expect valu .
now sure , follow korner's second maxim , we want to take into account all the data .
so why don't we simpli look at how far sn1 is from np1 , how far sn2 is from np2 , and so on , and add them all up ?
would thi be a good test ?
what we anticip , is that if that sum is veri larg , then that would suggest that at least on of the sn valu is far from where we expect it to be .
now , superfici thi sound reason , but then we realiz veri quickli , that we ar go to come a cropper becaus the sn valu could be distribut on either side of the expect .
and it is entir possibl to get a small sum where on element diverg far to the left of it expect valu .
in other word , we have a larg neg digress , and anoth valu accident cancel a larg neg compon by a larg posit digress to the right .
oh , so we could have accident cancel of larg posit and neg number give rise to a spuriou feel of normal of , of that everyth is okai , becaus the sum could be small , even though element could be veri larg posit , and veri larg neg .
so thi is not a good test .
what could we do ?
well , we realiz that we ar not interest realli , whether sn is to the left or to the right of it expect valu .
we onli want to know how far awai it is .
and so a natur idea might be , why don't we simpli look at the squar of these valu ?
now if you add them all up , if that sum is larg , then we know that at least on of the sn valu is far from where we expect .
thi is begin to sound promis .
but on introspect , it fall foul of korner's second maxim , that we should make an effort to take into account all the data fairli .
what doe thi mean ?
recal that the first iq bin ha a veri small probabl , <num> . <num> or someth like that .
the iq bin in the middl ha got a rel larg probabl , ten time .
which mean that in a random sampl , there ar go to be veri mani more element in the middl , then there ar at extrem .
which mean that the estim in the bin of the extrem , ar go to be underrepres .
thei're not go to be fairli account for .
to account for them fairli then , we should re normal by essenti the chanc of fall into the bin , in other word , by the varlabl .
and so it might come to our mind that the wai to do thi is to scale it so that everyon is in a common scale .
and natur , we'll scale by someth like the variabl , someth proport to the varianc .
now we've got a sum of eight contribut to deviat from where we expect these valu to be .
the contribut captur posit valu becaus we ar squar the normal scale by the variabl of each of the bin and now we have eight compon each contribut in fair and just proport .
paus for a moment to admir the eleg and beauti of such a simpl express which we obtain by simpl basic principl , the maxim that i tout earlier .
now , ye , from a larger break point of view it's a littl messi .
but sure for a comput point of view thi is veri easi .
how do we do thi ?
gener a sampl .
good .
from what ?
from an underli normal law .
good .
from the sampl , categor the element into which bin thei fall .
determin the valu sn1 , sn2 , through sn8 , veri simpl .
that's simpli a matter , matter of put them into bin and count .
compar each to the pre calcul valu , n time p1 , n time p2 , n time p8 .
rememb , n is the sampl size , it's known to us , nomin on thousand , but it could be anyth you like .
p1 through p8 were comput by look at the area under the curv .
we know these valu .
take the differ , that's a piec of cake .
squar it , simpl observ .
divid by n time p1 through n time p .
that's easi .
add them up .
thi is a computation trivial simpl procedur .
we can even conceiv of do it by hand if n is not too larg .
but assuredli , on a modern dai digit comput , thi can be done in a fraction and a trice .
thi is call a test statist .
okai , the word is peculiar to statist , it mean someth obtain by massag the data .
a simpl numer calcul us your sampl .
and thi particular sum ha been given a name , which ha becom enshrin by reason of tradit and histori .
the name we give it is the greek letter chi , squar .
so that sum is call chi squar and it wa articul by karl pearson as a test in set like thi in <num> .
so thi kai squar mean that sum of h , posit quantiti .
it's call the chi squar test statist .
now , thi is all well and good , at least thi is a principl statist .
the idea is that thi is a big number , whatev big mean .
then we ar led to feel that there is an aberr .
the data ar not repres of what thei should be .
so thi is the high level intuit .
but all thi intuit and the philosophi will be worthless if we cannot character what the probabl law of thi statist is .
rememb , chi squar is a chanc driven entiti .
it's a number , a posit number obtain from a random data .
what law character it ?
a clue is given to us by the fact that each of the valu sn1 through sn8 is binomi distribut and thei ar courtesi .
thei did more relop last year and individu , approxim , normal distribut .
so thi look like we ar sum the squar of normal and ad them .
there's go to be a complic .
the complic is that these valu sn1 through sn8 ar not independ .
the reason be , that the moment you put some element into on bin , you have fewer element to put in other bin .
right ?
so , for exampl , if sn1 is n , then everyth went into the first bin and we know that all the other ar zero .
there ar depend across these .
but none the less , these depend can be handl , the analysi is not at all easi .
but , we understand now that whatev the law for chi squar is , it is good to emerg from an underli normal law .
thi wa calcul by karl pearson , and it turn out to have a beauti , eleg represent .
and i'm go to have no compunct about show you the densiti for thi law without tell you how to get it .
after all , i haven't shown you a proof of the central limit theorem either .
and so i would hope that certainli that you would at least be temporarili will to take thi on faith , that a law of chi squar can be character .
it is call a chi squar distribut and it is said to have seven degre of freedom .
the terminolog aris becaus you see the sum of sn1 through sn8 is exactli the sampl size n .
in other word , ani seven of them complet determin the last on .
you onli have seven degre of freedom .
but i don't want to get into the technic detail here .
so thi object , whatev it is , aris from an underli normal .
and it's call the chi squar densiti with a certain number of degre of freedom .
as i told you , the origin of thi idea wa karl pearson , and he wa consid to perhap be on of the father of statist .
in the veri earli part of the 20th centuri , he , togeth with r . a .
fisher in england , laid down much of the framework of what we us in modern statist .
i cannot resist the temptat to tell you a littl anecdot about karl pearson .
he wa a formid man , sometim an eras man .
there's a biograph sketch provid by h . m .
walker in <num> in the intern encyclopedia of statist , in which he attempt to sketch the charact of thi formid intellectu and here's what walker sai .
pearson wa ask what wa the first thing that he could rememb ?
he said it wa sit in a high chair suck hi thumb .
so presum he wa veri young , a few year old .
a person came to him and said that he should stop suck hi thumb , and that if he did not it would whither and fall awai .
i took out my thumb , said he , put my two thumb togeth , and look at them for a long time .
the thumb i suck doe not look in ani wai smaller than the other .
i wonder if she could be ly to me .
and there in the simpl anecdot , in on fell swoop you have on , a reject of constitut author , in the form of , presum , hi nanni .
two , an appeal from a child to empir evid .
three , a belief in hi own interpret of the mean of observ data .
and four , final , an imput of moral obliqu to a person whose assess differ from hi own .
and there we have it , karl pearson , at presum ag three or four .
now with thi understand of a statist test we now have a wai forward to test bird's iq data .
the question is , ar the number report for adult , children , abber ?
well how shall we do thi ?
well let us begin by construct a <num> confid interv .
what doe that mean ?
select an interv where the chanc of the chi squar valu fall in that interv is . <num> .
why <num> ?
well choos what you will .
replac it by <num> , you get a slightli differ interv or <num> you get slightli bigger interv .
it doe not .
it make littl matter .
pick a number , a confid level that you ar happi with , let's sai <num> for definit .
now there ar mani wai of select an integr which captur <num> of the area under the chi squar densiti .
a natur wai to try to do thi is to sort of split the differ , as it were .
to choos an interv where two and a half percent of the area is to the left , and two and a half percent of the area is to the right .
and if you did that , what we'll have done , is essenti , identifi a left quantil , a valu a , to the left of which the area under the curv is . <num> .
togeth with a right quantil b chosen such that the area under the cab to the right of b is also . <num> .
and a numer calcul for thi particular densiti with seven degre of freedom show you that if you want a <num> confid interv arrang symmetr like thi , then the left quantil is about <num> . <num> .
the right quantil is about <num> . <num> .
now we've got a confid interv .
if you gener a random sampl and then comput a statist , a function of the data , a chi squar , and if the chi squar fall outsid that interv , we will be inclin to treat it as aberr .
here ar two reject criteria for potenti put data .
the first , what happen if you get data , you comput a chi squar valu us thi veri simpl formul , and you find the chi squar valu exce the number <num> . <num> ?
well , you know the chanc of thi is veri small , it's two and a half percent .
we reject the data with contum on the ground of an excess irregular .
but there is anoth possibl .
thi possibl that i've outlin for you is what is typic done in a statist packag , but the form of the densiti also tell us that not onli ar larg valu for chi squar not to be expect , but that veri small valu ar also suspect .
and so , a second part of thi test could be that if chi squar , the valu you comput from your data , is smaller than <num> . <num> , we again reject the data .
but thi time , on ground of a too suspici regular .
it's too good to be true .
if everi on of the sn valu land exactli where we expect it , that is begin to look a littl like somebodi cook the book .
it is make the case for fraud .
good .
we now have a veri simpl test .
and let's promptli go back to our data and see how the data valu fall with regard to thi test .
driven well we have a confid interv .
and now we can forget about everyth els except how to comput the chi squar and the confid interv , which is from <num> . <num> to <num> . <num> .
and our question now is where do the data fall in ?
to begin , we start for thi confid interv and now we comput the chi squar valu for first bird adult iq data .
second , that children will like your data .
and third , as a saniti check , for the random data that i gener on my comput , for a normal distribut with these paramet , there is a third bar .
and here is what we find .
the chi squar valu for the parent , for the adult clock in at . <num> for the given data .
the chi squar valu for the children clock in at <num> , both well to the left of the left quantil <num> . <num> .
thi is look too good to be true .
it's as if somebodi cook the book to make the number fall exactli where we want them to be .
as a saniti check , take a look at the data that i actual gener us a random number gener on my machin .
thi is the third bar .
it look wors , it look more aberr , more fluctuat .
it chi squar valu clock in at <num> . <num> , smack bang in the middl of our <num> confid interv .
the level of fluctuat there is actual to be , entir to be expect .
thi is what real random data would look like , a certain amount of random fluctuat is inescap and thi is veri typic .
but the data for the parent and the children on the other hand , look too suspici good , do thei not ?
but wait a minut .
the stori isn't quit done .
and the reason is , thi wa base upon an assumpt of a nomin sampl size of n be <num> .
but , bear in mind that vert told us that the three individu in the higher profession categori ar actual more like <num> .
perhap there wa a scale factor of <num> .
well what happen if <num> , <num> is scale by a certain scale factor ?
well i don't know what the scale factor is .
burt's paper doesn't tell us .
so , let's see what we can do if we pose it as scale factor .
let's sai the sampl size is <num> time n for some reduct from a sampl to a mill , a thousand .
let's take a look at what happen in the chi squar valu as the scale factor chang .
and if we go back to our sum for the chi squar and we put in n is at 1000m , we find that all that happen is that the report chi squar valu scale by m .
now , let's take a look at what conclus we can draw at a <num> level of confid .
whenev n is <num> , then the chi squar valu ar so excess small , the data ar just too good to believ .
we reject the data , with contum on ground that it is just too suspici regular .
fraud .
what if , on the other hand , the data were actual scale by a factor of <num> ?
in other word , m is <num> .
in thi case , <num> time . <num> and <num> time . <num> land us veri nice in the middl of the confid interv from <num> . <num> to <num> . <num> .
in thi case , the chi squar valu we get there ar exactli what we might anticip from just random fluctuat in data .
life happen , we don't alwai get perfect .
in fact , we rare get perfect in random data .
and what if , a scale factor , thi is not in burt's paper , but what if there wa actual scale for between <num> and <num> ?
that land us near the peripheri of the confid interv for both parent and children .
in thi case , we reserv judgement .
statist can onli do so much .
now , the point of thi exercis wa to show you , how , in an unexpect wai , central limit theorem argument could lead to fairli sophist analys of real life situat .
but real life is murki , okai ?
we cannot at thi stage look definit at the paper .
there's no other data avail from that time of birth .
he is long gone .
the peopl he survei presum ar also long gone .
there's no wai of test that data .
the listen might want to think about the difficulti , perhap if we would accept the suggest that the data size were actual more like <num> , <num> .
the difficulti of conduct <num> , <num> iq test for adult and <num> , <num> iq test for children , even over a period of <num> year .
and , even a veri crude calcul would suggest that on will have to do someth like three or four or five test everi dai for <num> year .
and , you might want to rumin on the difficulti of do someth like that on that scale .
okai .
but then perhap you might sai , well mayb you had help .
but of cours , these question ar all imponder .
and the attack of that and hi fervent defend had differ point of view on thi .
and to thi dai , the controversi still rage .
all right ?
with point of view on on side or the other .
the point of our excursu wa not to come to a definit conclus on whether burt wa more sin against than sin , whether he wa realli a great man who wa unfairli malign , calumni , or whether he wa actual a lone , impot man who commit fraud in a desper attempt to keep on to academ glori .
now such question ar far beyond a per view and a statist test cannot begin to elimin these issu .
but nonetheless , a principl test can provid a wai forward , can shed some light on what is an otherwis a veri murki busi .
right .
we don't need to just reli on faith .
we can do some analysi .
but , we should keep firmli in mind the limit of such analys .
to quot from t . w .
connor on more time , right .
he urg us to keep in mind that battalion of number , like battalion of men ar not alwai as strong as suppos .
summari of tableau <num> .
a potpourri of titil applic .
part <num> .
central tendenc .
stock portfolio select and the curiou case of sir cyril burt , psychologist .
independ weav a magnific path through the subject .
it crop up , most natur , in the concept of a random sampl , that of the repeat , independ trial .
sai x1 , x2 , x3 , and so forth .
suppos x is a typic exemplar of the underli chanc experi , which is be repeat ad infinitum .
let us sai that x ha a probabilist center of mass and expect , let's call that mu , and that x ha got an expect squar spread of varianc , sigma squar .
now , as we've seen repeatedli , sum plai a critic and import role in the entir theori .
and so natur we hasten to form partial sum .
s1 is just x1 .
s2 is x1 plu x2 .
s3 is x1 plu x2 plu x3 .
and so on , as n be the sum of x1 through xn .
and much of the basic theori devolv around the analysi of such accumul sum of independ variabl .
now in thi context , it is import to view thing at a proper locat and with a proper scale .
so accordingli , we take a sum s sub n .
and normal it to form thi normal version we call sn star .
and what is sn star ?
it locat sn properli at it center , in other word , we reloc the origin exactli at expect valu and then us it at a proper scale , by shrink or stretch the coordin ax , in such a wai that we're deal with a dimensionless quantiti .
a quantiti with unit spread .
that is your sn star .
now , with thi as background , the kei and central , the most intuit part of the theori is the law of larg number , that vener result from antiqu .
at it heart , it sai someth about a law of averag .
if on stop a layperson in the street and ask , what do you understand about chart ?
you might well get a respons along the follow line .
toss a coin <num> time and you'll get <num> head , and in a sens she would be right .
of cours the mathemat clarif of such an answer is given on your screen .
what we ar realli sai is that if we look at the rel frequenc , sn divid by n , then that quantiti , even though it is chanc driven , via a veri larg number of independ perturb , even so , thi averag quantiti , sn over n , behav essenti like a constant .
and which constant ?
inevit , the underli expect of the trial drive thi process .
inevit , mu .
so , sn over n is concentr at mu .
and mathemat what that mean is that the deviat of sn over n from mu is as small as you wish .
provid the number of trial becom larg enough .
we've seen beauti , subtl applic of thi fundament principl , but at it heart , it is not at all obviou .
it is true that we have grown accustom to such a statement such of a law of averag , which work magic .
and perhap we're so accustom to it that we don't paus to marvel at it .
if you look at it again , you realiz that it's sai someth quit sensat , quit remark .
we're ad mani independ perturb , each of the element in the sum , can vari ani wai you like and without regard to the other element in the sum .
what we've realli construct is a function of a larg number of independ vari quantiti .
and none the less , thi function of a larg number of independ vari quantiti , is behav , for all intent and purpos , like a constant .
we've seen rich and beauti exampl of thi principl .
where next ?
well , even it fondest adher would not sai that the law of larg number is particularli sharp .
it is a blunt instrument .
you see , we're divid by n and n is a larg quantiti .
a more precis view occur when we take a look at the expect valu and magnifi what is happen around it .
thi lead us to the quit remark central limit theorem .
so if you view sn , the partial sum , properli normal , in other word , center properli at thi expect valu and scale properli to have unit spread , then thi normal version sn star essenti behav as if it were govern by a magic bell curv .
the normal distribut , the normal densiti , emerg magic from these ruin .
quit unexpect , quit remark and extraordinarili subtl .
thi is the on curv to rule them all .
thi principl is behind much of mathemat statist .
and we've seen some beauti applic of thi idea .
where do we go from here ?
well , a magnific meal should not end with a singl dessert .
so i'd like to offer you on more tempt delicaci , to titil your palat , to tempt you to look further .
thi , in the next part of the dessert tableau , will take us into antiqu , an ideal which wa known to the greek , and which ha quit extraordinari , modern reverber .
and we shall rediscov an old friend who appear appar serendipit out of the wreck and ruin of the french revolut .
the poisson distribut .
thi is up next .
tableau <num> , a potpourri of titil applic .
part <num> , rare event and a probabilist siev .
ponder exist , le problem de rencontr , the coupon collector .
thi is a final , conclud , danger bend segment for thi cours .
let me take you back to a view of the subject that we began with at the start of thi tableau .
much of a progress wa gear toward end up with the basic limit law which ar central to the ether probabl .
at heart the limit law sai that thei deal with typic event .
thei talk about concentr and thi notion of central .
and out of these consider emerg the magnific normal distribut .
when we move to anoth domain then the limit law have a rather differ charact .
and thi is a set of rare event , extrema , exceed .
in these case , as we saw the poisson distribut emerg rather serendipit , magic , from nowher it seem by consider of rariti in bernoulli trial .
we shall see these lectur that thi in fact is part of a much more pervas and gentl paradigm .
a paradigm which we shall call the poisson paradigm .
let me begin our discuss by take you on a small detour .
through the ancient art of siev .
siev have been around sinc antiqu .
here ar some imag from around the world show you siev in us todai .
where doe on us these siev ?
well , to strain materi for impur .
to get at stone mix in with bushel of corn .
perhap if on is pan for gold , the impur ar in fact the gold .
you pan for gold nugget and try to the siev awai the dirt in which it resid .
now , while siev have been in common us for centuri , in the modern dai siev continu to be of us in a varieti of set , siev flour , siev in a teapot to catch the tea leav .
siev in high technolog , to purifi and catch impur in the product , for exampl , of semiconductor .
so siev have been around for a great long while .
what we shall do is take a new look at siev from a mathemat perspect .
we're go to be talk about a metaphor sift .
in mathemat filter , we ar go to be fish in a croissant pond .
so to set the stage , let me go back to an ancient and well understood inequ .
i'm go to take you back to five and a discuss of on of citi whenc emerg .
thi basic and simpl inequ that we call bool's inequ or the union bound .
captur in languag it sai someth veri , veri simpl .
the probabl of the union of a collect of event is no larger than the sum of the associ probabl .
now thi is a veri blunt instrument , the right hand side is hardli a good estim of the left hand side unless of cours the event ar disjoint , ar mutual exclus .
but in gener the bound doe not give us veri sharp answer .
none the less , it ha util and we've seen exampl of where bool's inequ turn out to be surprisingli efficaci .
but let's take a good hard look at a bound and sai , well i have an inequ .
i have a right hand side , where is it like to be us ?
i'm go to now focu , zoom in , on two region where thi bound becom strang interest .
the first reason is obviou , what if the sum on the right is a small number ?
now , that'll forc the probabl of the union to be a small number .
in such regim , the inequ is not grossli bad and on can imagin that it might well be us .
and it is but there's anoth region less obviou where the sum turn out to be remark us .
and thi is go to be the thrust of our lectur todai .
what if the sum on right is is larg ?
now what doe that mean ?
well , if a sum is on or larger then that is patent useless becaus we know that probabl on the left can not exce on .
or what if the sum on right is not small ?
but it is not on exactli , can anyth us be said .
turn out remark , ye .
some terminolog and some color will add to the pictur , so here's some color notat and terminolog .
let us think of the event , a1 , a2 , a3 and so fourth as bad event , someth bad happen .
and then of cours natur the complement of these event , the ag a complement ar what you call good event .
now with thi kind of idea to give us a feel for what we ar discuss .
in the union of all the ag mean , that if thi occur then some bad event occur .
on or more bad event occur , someth wick thi wai come .
convers , if the compliment of the union , other word , in other word , the intersect of the compliment of the ag occur then no bad event occur .
that's an interest thing to look at .
so with thi metaphor view of these event , let's turn to the two region where bool's inequ might perhap be us .
so let's start with a set that we're familiar with , what if bool's bound is near zero ?
now we can immedi conclud that if the right hand side is small than the left hand side is sandwich between zero and a small number .
and therefor the left hand side isn't immedi small .
if you want to be veri mathemat precis about it , if the sum on the right is no larger than some given tini , posit quantiti epsilon .
then the probabl of the intersect of the complement of these event .
<num> minu the probabl of the union of the of these event .
a probabl that noth bad happen will exce <num> minu epsilon .
although thei , thi is an import observ .
again if the sum is small then the probabl that no bad event occur is quit larg is near <num> .
thi could be put immedi to us in a varieti of circumst .
so for exampl , what ar the kind of thing we might want to look at ?
well , let's sai we take someth from medicin .
we ar watch a patient with cardiovascular problem over a period of time .
if over the period of observ , new cardiovascular event occur , no bad event occur then it is manifestli good .
and the chanc of that is high , we ar do well .
so , someth which is as worthi as thi is definit deserv of a slogan .
so here is our slogan , if bool's bound is near zero then most outcom ar good .
noth bad happen , excel .
what if the boundari is not near zero , what can we sai now ?
well let's suppos that bool's bound is potenti quit larg but less than on .
in that case , what can we possibl conclud ?
well if the right hand side is less than <num> , that manifestli sum the left hand side .
and so thi sai that if the sum on the right is no bigger than <num> then the probabl that no bad event occur is strictli posit .
what doe that bui us ?
it tell us that somewher in the space of outcom there is at least on outcom for thi ideal chanc experi for which none of that bad event will occur .
thi is tell us someth about the exist of good outcom and we'll promptli codifi it in a slogan .
we'll call it bool's siev , we ar fish in a probabilist pond .
we ar hunt for a probabilist needl in a probabilist hai stack and we don't know if it's there .
but bool's siev tell us that if the sum of probabl is strictli less than on even if it's quit larg , the sum could be sai <num> .
that would mean the probabl that no bad event occur , that all event ar good simultan .
no cardiac arrest occur over a period of observ .
none of a group of mobil phone call ar drop by the carrier .
if onli good event occur then there is on sampl point for which that will happen .
thi is tell us someth about the exist of a good outcom for an experi .
thi seem like veri stoni ground but look out of all of thi a princip ha emerg .
the set is on where we ar do a chanc experi .
we don't know if there ar ani good outcom for the experi .
we will see under these condit allow us to conclud that there exist at least on good outcom .
and of cours , prove exist is an import first step .
we won't look for a hypothet quantiti which mai or mai not be there unless we have some guarante it actual exist .
we'll promptli put thi to us and you'll see how delic argument emerg from hi appar innocu observ .
we could look at sophist exampl of bool's siev in oper , but we have bigger fish to catch here .
so i'm go to give you a whimsic exampl just to illustr how an appar unprofit teril , dry terrain , there ar possibl for analyt investig .
so the question i'm go to give you is that of a parti game of no great moment .
you could imagin plai thi with peopl in a group .
the issu is embed a cube in a sphere color with two color .
so here's a gener sphere .
two colour , let's sai a red and blue .
and what we're go to do is we're go to take the sphere and we're go to emb a cube in it , of cours , so that the vertic of the cube ar on the surfac of thi sphere .
so we're go to put a cube insid thi sphere .
we're go to be free to arrang the cube in ani orient we want .
here is a whimsic question , given a two colour sphere , with some percentag of red and blue , and some water on the surfac .
is it alwai possibl for a given sphere to find an embed of a cube with some orient in such a wai that all the vertic have the same colour .
let me , to focu that thought , immedi make thi a littl more concret .
so let's begin by consid a set where we have a sphere where half the surfac is red and half the surfac is blue .
i'm go to put no restrict on how the color ar spread .
but at the end of the dai , we want the follow attribut that <num> of the area of the sphere is red , and <num> is blue .
given such a sphere , is it alwai possibl to find an embed of a cube insid a sphere in such a wai that everi vertex of the cube , you know there ar eight vertic , everi vertex resid on a patch which is blue in color ?
in short , everi vertex is blue .
paus the lectur and think about thi .
plai with thi for a bit .
resum when you ar readi .
well , have you thought about it ?
what did you find ?
of cours , there ar orient where depend on how you color the sphere , for exampl , in band of red and blue , where we could find orient of the cube where everi vertex is blue .
of cours , there ar such color .
but the question is , is it true for everi color of the sphere ?
and , in thi case , the answer is , no .
a simpl exampl might serv to convinc you that it's not alwai go to be possibl .
the simplest color you could imagin with thi kind of attribut , where half the sphere is red and half the sphere is blue is where there's on hemispher which is red , and on hemispher which is blue .
and i've show , shown you such a sphere divid into two piec , the red and the blue piec .
a littl thought will convinc you now that it is imposs in such a case .
for ani orient of a cube whatsoev to be such that the entir cube ha got ani blue vertic .
for exampl , a simpl pythagorean consider will tell you that if the sphere ha got unit radiu , then the side of the cube must be the squar root of two over three , approxim <num> . <num> .
and now we can convinc you so that it is not go to be possibl , no matter how much you huff and puff , to emb a cube in thi sphere in such a wai that everi vertex is in the blue hemispher .
okai .
what if i increas the amount of blue on the sphere ?
so here's anoth test case .
what if the sphere now ha got <num> of it surfac area cover in blue , <num> cover in red ?
i don't prescrib how the color should happen .
ani color with <num> blue and <num> red .
given such an arbitrari color of the sphere , is it alwai possibl to emb a cube in some orient in such a wai so that everi vertex is blue .
now paus the lectur , plai with it for a bit , think about it .
resum when you're readi .
so , thi is our question .
we have a sphere , <num> of which is red , <num> is blue .
of cours , the difficulti is i can imagin set where it is easi to emb a cube , so that everi vertex is blue .
but the difficulti is figur out whether there ar some awkward color for which it mai not be possibl .
here then , is a turn in an unexpect direct in the analysi of such a problem .
in the problem i've given you , there ar , there ar no chanc connot whatsoev .
thi is a pure determinist problem .
you ar given a sphere with a certain color , certain ratio of red and blue .
and you're ask to sai whether by dint of care posit you could somehow emb a cube in there such that all the vertic ar blue .
what is so random about that ?
there seem to be noth random at all .
well , here is a beauti new idea .
thi idea is the principl of ancillari random .
shoehorn random into the problem in a domain where there wa none a priori .
and you would think well , doesn't that make thing wors ?
we start with a determinist set and now you've obfusc the matter , you've made thing random ?
of cours there is a method in the mad .
here's a new question .
start with a given sphere , with a certain color <num> of thi sphere is blue , <num> is red .
it's a fix , but arbitrari color , start with that .
there is noth random at thi point .
now , here's what we want to do .
there ar mani , mani , mani wai , in fact , an infinit number of wai in which you can emb a cube insid a given sphere .
select an embed at random .
i'm not go to try make explicit the sampl space of thi problem here .
it's clear that the experi as i'm imagin it ha to have certain symmetr properti .
right .
random in the sens that , roughli speak , we're deal with a uniform distribut of possibl .
if you listen to the lectur of tablo ex part two , andthenw're go to be talk about a uniform densiti of a surfac of a sphere .
if you haven't , no matter , a , an intuit understand of what random is in thi context will suffic .
roughli speak , all orient should be equal like .
under such set , we can postul an event .
some orient mai or mai not .
end up with all vertic blue .
look at the collect of cube orient where all vertic ar blue .
thi collect , thi set could be empti .
if it's not empti , then it start becom strang interest .
notic in thi problem as set up , i have no apiari guarante that the set of interest to me , the set of orient where everi vertex is blue is not empti .
thi is go to be the critic point .
is that set empti or not ?
now with thi of understand , let's put in place a littl bit of nomenclatur , a littl bit of notat .
just a smidgen .
you've got anoth cube embed randomli insid thi given sphere .
ani given vertex mai or mai not be blue .
let's tag the vertic , label them sai from on through eight .
on , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight .
you've got eight vertic .
for each of the vertic , let's introduc an event .
these ar the bad event .
let a j be the event , but the jth vertex is red .
in other word , a1 is the event that the first of the tag vertic happen to have the misfortun of fall in a red area .
a2 is the event that a second vertex fall in a red area .
and so on down .
a8 is the event that the eighth label vertex of the cube fall in a red area .
rememb we want all vertic to be blue , so each of these is bad .
if ani of them occur , then all vertic ar not blue .
so natur we're interest in the probabl of the union of these event .
but what can we sai about each individu probabl ?
the random , think about all orient lose speak ar equal like .
the random implicit here sai that a probabl of a given vertex , eg red , is proport to the percentag of the area of the sphere that is red .
in other word , the probabl that the first vertex is red .
is <num> .
ten percent of the surfac area is red .
the probabl the second vertex is red ?
<num> why ?
becaus there ha all kind of symmetri here , each vertex in isol behav like all other vertic .
thi is what i mean implicitli by random select of orient .
and so , each of these vertic individu ha a on tenth chanc , a <num> chanc , of land in a red region .
if ani of these event occur , then someth bad ha happen .
at least on vertex now will be red .
and therefor , promptli , we talk about a probabl of the union of these event .
and bool's siev immedi tell us that the probabl that on or more vertic is red , on or more bad event occur , is no more than <num> time <num> , or <num> .
now nobodi in their right mind is go to look at <num> and sai well , that is a small probabl .
no , it's actual quit a larg probabl , it's near on .
but , and thi is a materi point , <num> is strictli less than on .
what can thi sai about the probabl of the good event ?
that none of the bad event occur , that onli good event occur , that everi vertex is blue , tell us that thi probabl must exce on minu <num> or <num> .
the probabl that no vertex is red , the probabl that everi vertex is blue is at least <num> .
it is not zero , and what doe thi tell us ?
thi tell us that there must exist at least on orient of the cube for thi given sphere for which everi vertex is blue .
if thi were not true , if there wa no orient of a cube for the given sphere for which everi vertex were blue , if that happen , then the set of orient for which everi vertex is blue would be empti .
and so the probabl of that set would be zero .
the imposs event ha zero probabl .
the veri fact that a probabl of the set at hand , the probabl of the set of orient of a cube for which everi vertex is blue , is not zero , it's <num> .
though that particular number is not german for our purpos , all that matter is it is not zero .
it is strictli posit .
that tell you that that set cannot be empti .
there ar orient of the cube for a given sphere , which would make everi vertex blue .
magic almost , we've deduc a result of exist .
come on back .
go back to the start of the problem .
we didn't know if the answer wa posit .
we didn't know if it wa possibl to emb a cube in a sphere where <num> of the sphere is blue , <num> red , in such a wai that everi vertex wa blue .
we didn't know it wa possibl .
and simpl experi , exampl , didn't lead us closer to a definit answer , becaus there wa alwai the possibl of a peculiar color which resist all our blandish .
no order of the cube wa go to work .
it wa entir possibl that the set of orient which work wa zero , wa null .
but now , our auxiliari random tell us , now there exist at least on orient .
we prove the exist of an orient .
now , thi is an amus , perhap , parti game .
through all the data we've got a result , that wa not intuit , that wa not expect .
and two thing leap out at us .
on wa , we've done someth differ in thi experi .
we start with an experi where there wa no chanc anywher in view , and we shoehorn in , we introduc random through auxiliari random .
normal , ad chanc element just complic a process .
but in thi set , ad a chanc element creat a solut for a problem .
the idea here , and thi is speak a littl philosoph , why these approach work , it is becaus the origin problem wa horribl in it's particular detail .
each individu colour had to be analyz separ .
and the colour ar , first an infinit in number .
and we could have some realli weird colour .
you could have possibl exhaust the space by check all of them .
what our random ha done so cleverli is to symmetr the problem .
at it heart , mathemat work best , scienc work best , when there ar symmetri .
perhap it's a limit of our human mind that we react best to pattern that ar visibl , to symmetri in the structur .
but in ani case , symmetri allow us to make an analyt fest of the problem where otherwis it is intract .
so thi wa the high level idea , the random creat symmetri .
the second idea wa that from these symmetri we could extract a probabilist save .
we could extract , catch in our siev an orient and let all the other rabidli non work orient go , flood out , with a siev .
so , we have two beauti pavo principl which evolv .
these turn out to be quit subtl and quit rich , but as i said , we have other fish to fry .
bool's siev by itself work beautifulli in some set like thi .
but not even it's fondest adher would sai it's precis .
for problem of more delicaci , we're go to need more delic siev .
and we will turn to thi next .
so , our idea now is to think of a metaphor probabl siev .
our siev is go to try to sift through possibl at random and try to find nugget of inform .
we ar go to try to get a siev , which is a littl more delic than the rather crude siev rate us pool's siev .
and the provenc here realli is go to be thi and here's where the big pai off is go to be .
we're go to be deal the provenc of rare event .
and therefor , we're look for thi nugget of gold .
thi nugget of inform , which mai or mai not be there .
and we're go to siev through the possibl and try to discov it .
so thi is the high level philosoph bent to how we ar approach these issu .
so let me take you back to tableau five , yet again .
the basic principl inform everyth .
and thi time , go back to the idea of addit in the guis of the inclus exclus theorem .
when i teach my life class , my student joke that i invari talk about the import of addit and i encourag my student to .
or thei wake up in the morn to genuflect rever three time in the direct of that magnific principl .
so , i should exhort you to do the same .
addit is thi guid principl , which i've oft repeat , which is at the heart of mathemat .
in the guis of inclus exclus here is an ident we had discov .
we discov through the probabl of disjunct of the union of two event could be written as the sum of the event probabl from which you take awai the probabl of the conjunct or the intersect .
and visual , from a venn diagrammat point of view , it's quit clear what's go on .
the union on the left , talk about the two blob put togeth .
on the right , we first add up the individu probabl of those two piec and then we've find we've overcount , we've overcompens .
the len in the middl wa count twice and so we promptli subtract onc and bob's your uncl , you've got an ident .
now , in a danger bend individu lectur on tableau five , thi wa the lectur titl someth to rumin on .
we tri to extend thi principl to three event .
now , i can have no compunct whatsoev about show you a danger bend segment , becaus thi entir part is a danger bend tableau .
so here is the ident we've discov , if you need to go back to tableau five to look at thi lectur again to remind yourself of whenc thi came .
the ident said that the probabl of the union of three event could be decompos as follow , as a sum of event probabl from which you subtract variou possibl for the conjunct of event two at a time and then you add back the probabl of the conjunct of all three event , the intersect of all three of them .
if we were to extract a gener principl here it is thi .
add odd , subtract even .
let's immedi take thi epiphani and extract a deeper , richer principl out of thi .
so notic you've , i've given you the two inclus exclus ident .
and thi time group in piec , in segment , where it make clear thi idea of ad odd and subtract even .
we ar now look forward to extend thi principl not just to three or four event , but to a gener number n of event .
and you want to sai someth about the probabl of the union of all of them .
now the inclus exclus principl in it guis , when we had n equal to <num> , n equal to <num> , such is the import of group in odd and even .
let's promptli introduc a littl notat to captur thi .
so let us write s1 for the sum of the individu event probabl .
the probabl of a1 plu the probabl of a2 through the probabl of an .
let's write s2 for the sum of the probabl of the intersect of the event , two at a time .
probabl of a1 , intersect a2 .
a1 and a3 and so on .
a1 through an .
a2 with a3 .
a2 with a4 .
a2 through an and so on , conclud with an minu <num> accept with an .
out of all those possibl , call that s2 .
s3 , then is go to be the sum of the probabl of intersect of the event , three at a time .
a1 , a2 and a3 .
a1 , a2 and a4 and so on with all possibl of three at a time .
s4 is the four wise intersect probabl of event , all ad up .
and in gener , as you see on your screen , sk repres the sum of all k wise intersect probabl .
now the sum of the right , admittedli appear complex and intimid .
but if we stare at it long enough , the piec becom appar .
what ar we try to do ?
we ar go to try to identifi , let's sai , k event .
identifi them .
sai , j1 , j2 , j3 through jk .
let's keep matter formal and clear by sai , let's make sure j1 is the smallest of indic and jk is the largest of these indic .
now take the probabl of the intersect of those k event .
and now look at all the possibl for j1 through jk , as j<num> is bound below about <num> and jk is bound abov by n and run through all possibl .
and now we should argu for yourself that thi sum captur all wai of take k event and comput the probabl of the intersect and ad them .
all right .
so now we've got these sum .
natur , i'm us s for a sum here .
s1 , on at a time .
s2 , two at a time .
sk , k at a time .
and now the gener principl of ad odd and subtract even sai , veri simpli the follow .
the inclus exclus theorem in some level of gener sai , the probabl of the union of n event is given by an altern sum start with s1 , the sum of the event on at a time .
subtract s2 , the sum of the event probabl two at a time .
at back s3 , the sum of even probabl three at a time .
and you go on that ha autom sum , ad and subtract , ad and subtract .
and final , you add or subtract sn , which ha got onli on probabl , the probabl of the intersect of all of them .
we notic that when n is even , the last n is go to be neg .
and when n is all , the last n is go to be posit .
and that explain the minu <num> to the power n minu <num> .
when n is even , you get a neg number .
when n is odd , it becom posit .
now we'll call thi the babi version of the theorem .
of cours , that should have given you a clue that a stronger industri strength version is lurk in the background .
befor we launch into a proof of thi , let's extract the gener version , becaus the proof is now go to be materi harder in a more gentl form .
let us begin , discuss of the first segment of thi lectur .
by a review of the notion of central that we have seen in the law of larg number , and in the central materi .
the idea here is that these captur typic .
what other set ?
we start by consid a random sampl .
independ select bui frai from some underli distribut .
repeat independ trial .
so , let x1 , x2 , x3 be a sequenc of independ trial .
x repres an exemplar of thi sequenc .
thei all have a common probabl law , a common distribut .
and let us sai , for definit , that the underli probabl law ha got an expect mu and a varianc sigma squar .
we immedi form partial sum of the sequenc .
so let s sub n as usual , repres the sum of the first n axi .
a standard version of a sum is obtain by center it at zero and make the spread unit .
and thi lead to a standard or normal variabl .
sn which center sn by subtract it expect n time mu from it , and scale it to unit .
make it dimensionless if you will , by divid by the standard deviat of sn which is the squar root of n time sigma .
so , let's begin .
what can we sai about these sum and these standard sum ?
the law of larg number , which is the heart of the theori of probabl , sai that the rel frequenc , sn over n , the sampl mean , is asymptot concentr at it expect valu mu .
what doe thi mean ?
well we can dress it up by talk about deviat from the center .
and in fact the strong law of larg number of sai , that the probabl that sn over n , the sampl mean , deviat from it's expect valu , by epsilon or more , goe to zero .
anoth wai of sai thi is that view as a sequenc of sampl mean , s1 over on , s2 over two , s3 over three , sn over n .
these sequenc converg with probabl on to their expect valu .
so , here's a power notion of concentr .
the central materi add flesh to these bare bone and sai in the region around the center , you have a normal distribut , a bell curv emerg .
and so a formal statement is that , a suitabl standard , normal version of sn , sn is asymptot , for larger valu of n , normal distribut .
and of cours what thi mean is that the probabl that sn take valu in ani interv , is asymptot govern by the area under the bell curv over that interv .
so these ar the two fundament limit law .
we shall now tend to two subtl applic of these law .
here's the set .
rememb the sk's ar all the ky's intersect probabl sum .
k run from <num> through n .
the inclus , exclus principl tell us i can get the probabl of a union , a disjunct , by ad and subtract these term on at a time .
now i'm go to remind you of an old principl and thi is go to engend for us a complet new and veri us vantag point .
so to do thi , let me introduc just a smidgen of notat .
rememb that in the context of siev , i talk about the event a1 , a2 , through an as bad event .
of cours thi is just to lend color to our problem , which would otherwis be drab and algebra .
so , bad event occur if ani of the as occur .
let's introduc some notat to captur the occurr of a bad event .
so , for an index j , run from <num> through n , let x sub j be a variabl , which take a valu <num> , if the bad event aj occur , and is <num> otherwis .
in other word , the valu of xj is a flag , is an indic for whether the bad event aj occur .
thi is promis becaus the moment i give you nomenclatur and notat like thi , that should tug at mayb a faint atavist thread in your memori .
where have i seen thing like thi befor ?
of cours , xj is a chanc variabl .
it depend upon the perform of the underli experi , and whether the chanc outcom is in aj or not .
but xj at heart is a coin toss .
it's a <num> , <num> variabl .
xj is a bernoulli trial .
now what's complic matter here is that as you let j run through the indic <num> through n , then the valu x<num> , x2 , x3 , through xn , the indic for whether the bad event <num> through n occur ar not necessarili independ .
if thei were we'd have the familiar set of repeat toss of a coin .
now we have toss of a coin but the toss could depend on previou toss .
depend is bake into the , into the cake here .
but nonetheless , our experi of <num> coin toss sai , well , it is veri profit to look at the accumul sum , the accumul number of success of these coin toss .
let's do so without ani further ado .
suppos we add the indic x1 through xn .
i , i would love to give thi sum a name , s , but s is alreadi spoken for .
we us sk for these sum of these conjunct probabl , so let's introduc a new notat .
let's call thi partial sum of x1 through xn , m sub n .
thi stand for the accumul sum of these indic .
in word , mn tell us how mani of the bad event occur when the experi wa perform .
excel , now we've just recast the problem in a new light .
a littl smidgen of extra notat , if you will humor me .
we're go to simplifi all our equat and make them look veri , veri symmetr .
sk wa defin at the top of your screen as a sum of conjunct probabl , k at a time .
k ran from <num> through n .
it'll be awfulli conveni if we introduc some notat for the ks , k equal to <num> , and here it is .
as a matter of definit , let's defin s sub <num> to be <num> .
now , with thi in hand , let's go and take a look at our inclus exclus principl .
and now let's recast it in a veri gener light .
so , the inclus exclus principl , the probabl of the union , tell us about the probabl of anyth bad happen .
the probabl of noth bad happen is clearli the obvers of the complement of thi .
and therefor , the probabl of the intersect of the complement of all these event .
the probabl that no bad event occur , that onli good event will occur , is <num> minu the probabl that ani bad event occur .
of cours , thi is simpli addit .
we partit the space into two piec , a bad union , and it complement , a good intersect .
for the probabl of the union , the babi version of the inclus exclus principl tell us we've got an altern sum , an s1 minu s2 plu s3 and so on .
now , in front , i've got a <num> there .
well , we can identifi that with s0 per our definit , and then i subtract my altern sum , s1 , s2 , s3 .
so , what have i done ?
i start with s0 .
then , i have to subtract s1 , and now the sign of s2 flip .
and it becom ad s2 , and then the sign of s3 flip and becom subtract s3 , and so on down .
and the last term becom minu <num> to the power nsn , and so now we've got a fairli eleg , at least easi to rememb , formul for the probabl that no bad event occur .
it's written as s0 minu s1 plu s2 and so on .
with s0 , just by definit as <num> , but the probabl of no bad event occur .
thi could be ad and defin with the probabl , in term , offer a accumul sum of indic .
thi is the probabl that the accumul sum of indic is <num> , no bad event occur .
in other word , what we've comput is the probabl of an atom for m sub n .
where is said the probabl that m sub n is <num> , that no bad event occur is given by thi altern sum start at <num> .
s0 is <num> , minu s<num> plu s2 and so forth .
and thi open a door for a gener which is quit power .
it is unlook for , rememb , origin we were just talk about union , conjunct and , and disjunct .
but now we realiz at the heart of it is also a count element .
we ar count how mani bad event occur .
of cours , it'll be ideal if none occur .
but in the context of rare event , we should alwai draw the distinct clearli between implaus and imposs .
it is implaus that a rare event occur , but it is not imposs .
then the question is , how mani of these bad event occur ?
we ar now prepar .
our inclus exclus principl , the babi version tell us in the simplest form that the probabl of no bad event occur is given by an altern sum .
it should come as no great surpris that in gener now , we've got an altern form for the probabl of a certain number of bad event occur .
what is the probabl that exactli k bad event occur ?
it doesn't matter which k , but some k occur .
what is the probabl of that ?
again , we ar go to have an altern formul involv these ss .
rememb , what ar the ss ?
thei repres sum of conjunct probabl .
if we expand out such a sum , for exampl , on the right , what is the veri first term ?
well , j is <num> .
if j is <num> then we have k choos k time sk with a posit sign in front becaus we have minu <num> to the power of <num> .
what if j is <num> ?
then you have minu <num> to the power <num> , which give you a neg sign .
and then you have k plu <num> choos k , time s of k plu <num> .
the sum of all intersect probabl k plu <num> at the time .
next term , j equal to <num> , while minu <num> to the power <num> is plu <num> .
then you have k plu <num> choos k and then you have sk plu <num> , the sum of all k plu 2y's intersect probabl and so on down .
okai , thi is now the industri strength version of the inclus exclus theorem .
and i have not made clear yet that whether or how thi connect to thi idea of a metaphor siev .
right now we ar build background , but we can see some tenuou connect .
the siev dealt with probabl of union or , equival , the probabl of the intersect of complement .
the sum of these indic , these bad indic , tell us someth about how mani of these rare or bad event occur .
and so in thi inclus exclus principl seem a strategi , for creat a metaphor probabl siev to try to siev out the bad event from the ensembl .
so let's begin first by provid an elementari proof of thi principl .
and to do so , there ar sever approach .
but to do so , i'll pick on which appeal to me , by appeal to a principl from magic .
let me sketch for you a proof of the theorem of inclus and exclus .
there ar sever wai we can go about do thi , but let me pick on wai , which ha a salutari valu of be particularli us as a wai of think about these problem , and it ha got the ancillari benefit of be particular us in the advanc theori .
the idea borrow from the old magician's standbi pick a card , ani card .
we ar go to try to do the same thing , with our view now from a sampl point .
so let's begin with a collect of n event , a1 through an , in some probabl space .
we will not worri now about whether there ar ani depend constraint between these event or not .
it doe not matter for our purpos , these ar arbitrari event in a probabl space .
let's put togeth indic for the occurr of these event .
sai let's sai that x1 is the indic for the occurr of the event a1 .
in other word x<num> is equal to <num> , if a<num> occur and x1 is equal to <num> otherwis .
x2 likewis is the indic for the occurr of the event a2 and proceed along these line , gener let's write x sub j for the indic for the occurr of the event a sub j .
now , recal that inclus exclus principl devolv upon variou inclus exclus sum .
and the notat wa formid , but the concept at heart wa eleg and simpl .
let's sai we fix ani valu k between <num> and n .
pick ani collect of k out of the n event .
it's an arbitrari collect , so let's tag them with gener indic j1 , j2 , j3 , through j sub k .
look at the probabl of the intersect of those k event .
now , some such probabl over all choic of k event out of n , and that is all that the formid look sum repres .
sk in word is the sum of all ky's intersect probabl of the underli event a1 thru an , of cours k here is a gener integ between <num> and n .
in our inclus exclus formul , we're go to see term like sk , sk plu <num> .
well , what is sk plu <num> ?
well , simpli in the formul replac k by k plu <num> , in other word , add all k plu <num> ys intersect probabl .
if we replac k by k plu <num> , then simpli add all k plu <num> ys intersect probabl replac k by k plu <num> in the sum .
and likewis , sk plu j for the gener j , would be the sum of all the k plu jy intersect probabl , replac k by k plu j in the sum .
okai , with thi in place there is the gener principl of inclus and exclus .
the principl sai someth about the number of occurr of these underli event a1 through an .
if you look at the sum of the indic , x1 plu x2 plu x3 through xn , the sum will just flag whichev event occur .
you'll get a <num> when precis that event occur , and therefor the sum will give you exactli the number of occurr of the event a1 through an .
so on the left hand side what you discov is the probabl that the number of occurr take some given valu k , k of cours is arbitrari .
it could be a number between <num> and n .
on the right hand side , we get an altern sum , and it look complex assuredli but what we take awai from thi is atop all those binomi coeffici which appear on the right , what you're see ar the term which involv the ky intersect of probabl , the k plu 1ys intersect of probabl , the k plu 2ys intersect of probabl , and so on and so forth .
the high level principl here is thi , if it turn out that intersect probabl ar rel easi to comput in the problem , then these probabl for the distribut for the number of occurr of these event is now readili comput .
perhap not in close form , but at least numer comput .
of cours the simplest of these set , rememb is when we have independ becaus an intersect probabl is just evolv into product .
the great worth of thi principl is thi is go to take us beyond independ .
even in set where the event ar not independ , but the degre of independ is not sever .
if it is mild , then perhap we have a chanc of comput intersect probabl , perhap by dint of a littl more effort .
and if we can do that , then we can comput the distribut of the number of occurr .
look so , here for the first time in our entir sequenc of lectur , we ar hit upon a theoret principl which will allow us to move beyond independ albeit in a modest wai toward mild depend .
okai .
so thi is the set , and why thi kind of structur will be import .
how do we go about verifi a formul like thi ?
now in the case when k wa <num> , then we ar target the question , the problem of .
what is the probabl that none of these event occur ?
and you'll recal from our context in civ if these event a1 through an reflect bad event .
then you're ask what's the probabl of the occurr of someth bad ?
venn diagram prove to be particularli efficaci in that set .
and we could almost read out the inclus exclus formula by over count , under count , over count , under count , and edg up to a solut .
we could progress along similar line for a gener formul , but as i promis you , we're go to take a differ tack here .
the tack of the magician take a card , ani card .
in our context , fix ani valu k , and pick ani sampl point , sai littl omega .
thi at least ha a salutari valu of forc you to ask what is the basic underli sampl space for the problem ?
the veri first question we should have start with .
start with that pick a sampl point , ani point .
now thi sampl point will resid in mayb none of the event a1 through an , perhap in on of those event , perhap in sai l of them , where l is ani number between <num> and n .
pick a sampl point and ask thi equat , how much doe thi sampl point contribut to the left hand side of the equat and to the right hand side ?
if it contribut an equal amount to the left and to the right , and thi is true for everi sampl point , then you'll have prove the principl of inclus and exclus .
so let's directli start by sai the select sampl point whatev it is , is in a set of number of these event a1 through an .
let sai l where l is a number between <num> and n .
what can we conclud ?
well let's identifi which l of the event , thi omega actual is n .
of cours i don't know ahead of time , which l let's give them gener name .
let's sai omega li in the event , a sub j1 and also an a sub j2 and so on , and also in a sub jl and in none of the other .
all right , now we've identifi which of the event omega trigger , which of the event thi particular outcom is favor for ?
what would you tell me that the particular sampl point omega that you have select li in these l event ?
then we know that the number of event that occur is exactli l or anoth word in a slightli more verbos mathemat languag .
the sum of the indic x1 through xn is l , becaus precis l of the xs take valu <num> , and the remain take valu is <num> .
the xs record exactli which event occur when omega is the outcom .
excel .
now onc we understand thi , now we've got an equat .
if omega is an l of the event , then we know that the event on the left is trigger precis when l is equal to k , rememb k is a fix valu .
there ar now three case , and here thei ar .
the number of event that omega li in could be either smaller than k , equal to k , or larger than k .
we should take thi in time , and so let's promptli do thi .
let's take these three case on at a time .
rememb , here is how we have posit ourselv , fix ani k and hold it .
it's fix but arbitrari , a number between sai , zero and n .
now select an omega .
thi sampl point is in a certain of number of these event , between zero and n .
let's sai , there's l of a event .
now we're go to look at the variou case for l .
rememb , the sampl point is now fix .
suppos l is less than k , your sampl point is in fewer than k of the given event .
if that is the case , then manifestli , the sum of the indic is l , which is given to be less than k it is instanc .
such an omega cannot possibl resid in the event on the left .
and therefor , such an omega will contribut noth to the probabl of the left hand side .
what about the altern sum on the right ?
well , the first stem of the sum reflect sk , which is the sum of all the k wise intersect probabl .
now rememb , the k's bigger than l in thi case .
pick ani k wise intersect through the event a1 through an .
at best , that k wise intersect will contain all l of those event , where omega resid .
but there ar still go to be further event in that intersect in which omega doe not resid .
thei've given it , l is less than k .
and therefor , ani k wise intersect of these event cannot contain that given omega .
and therefor , omega will contribut noth to the entir term sk and for even stronger reason , a for sure a .
omega can contribut noth to sk plu <num> .
omega can contribut noth to sk plu <num> and so forth .
and therefor , such an omega contribut noth to the entir right hand side .
and so we're happi if l is less than k , then ani sampl point which resid in l of these event will contribut noth to the left and noth to the right .
what if l is exactli equal to k ?
then on the left , it is clear .
becaus now the sum is k and therefor , the event is automat trigger .
if l is equal to k , if omega resid in precis k of the event , then omega contribut onc to the event on the left hand side .
but what about the right ?
now , on the right , sinc omega resid in exactli k event onli , no k plu <num> intersect can contain omega .
no k plu <num> intersect can contain omega and so on .
and therefor , none of the term sk plu <num> , sk plu <num> and so on , on the right will contribut to the right hand side .
what about the term sk ?
well , sinc omega is in k design event , precis the on intersect compris of those k event will contain omega .
and none of the other k wise interact will contain omega .
and therefor , the chosen omega will contribut exactli onc to the term sk and will contribut noth to ani of the other term .
well , in front of sk , we have a k choos k .
and therefor , the chosen omega will contribut k choos k time <num> time to the entir right hand side , but k choos k is <num> .
and therefor , if l is equal to k , then omega will contribut onc to the left , onc to the right .
and again , we're in good shape .
what if l is bigger than k ?
and now thi is the on case where some algebra dig is go to be requir .
well , if l is bigger than k , on the left it is easi , becaus the sum is bigger than l , which is k .
and therefor , such an omega cannot resid in the event on the left hand side .
what about the right hand side ?
now thi is go to requir a littl bit of thought .
if more than l term ar pull out on the right hand side , then ani k plu j wise intersect .
where k plu j exce l , cannot possibl contain that omega .
rememb , omega is an l .
so , if you choos more than l event , then omega cannot resid in their intersect , which tell us that on the right hand side , we can onli get contribut from the term sk , sk plu <num> , sk plu <num> through sl .
rememb , l is no bigger than k .
and we will not get ani contribut from the term sl plu <num> , sl plu <num> and so forth for that chosen omega .
so let's then pick a gener term , which thi omega will contribut to .
so let's pick a term , let's sai , sk plu j .
j now can onli run between zero and l minu k .
so that we're look at the term between , we have a k wise intersect all the wai up to an l wise intersect .
so let's take a look at the a term sk plu j .
when you ar look at sk plu j , rememb k plu j now is go to be smaller than l , at most it is equal to l .
we're go to look at a k plu j wise intersect .
in such a case , the onli term that'll contribut is if everi term in that intersect is on of the event that omega resid in .
how mani possibl ar there ?
well , there ar l possibl for select event that omega resid in , out of which i want to select k plu j .
let's stitch it all togeth .
for the gener k plu jth term .
there ar l choos k plu j wise of select k plu j event all contain omega and all these will contribut to the term sk plu j , each of these will contribut onc to that term .
in front of thi term , i've got a binomi coeffici , which sai , k plu j choos k .
and in front of that , i've got a minu on to the power j .
and now i'm go to sum over the rang , j run from zero thru l minu k .
thi doesn't look like zero or doe it ?
well , now we're go to have to do some explor .
what can you sai about such an altern sum of binomi coeffici ?
let's begin by take a look at the sum and , so we ar go to start build a combinatori ident .
the kei element in a sum and is the product of two binomi coeffici , k plu j choos k time l choos k plu j .
let's write out these binomi coeffici .
the first on give you a ratio of factori , k plu j factori divid by k factori j factori .
and a second binomi coeffici , give you anoth ratio of factori .
that's l factori divid by k plu j factori and then a term , l minu k minu j factori .
we stare at thi and sai , well , clearli , there ar term , k plu j factori in both numer and denomin .
let's promptli , cancel them .
and now we've got what look like a slightli compact set of fraction .
take a good hard look at these fraction .
do thei remind you of anyth ?
think about it for a moment and then restart the lectur .
on concentr , if you said , these individu fraction remind me of other binomi coeffici , then you ar inde on the right track .
let's construct new binomi coeffici by multipli and divid by l minu k factori .
rememb , we ar deal with a set where l is bigger than k .
also , far so good .
i've got , i've done no violenc to the ident on the right hand side .
but now , i notic that the first fraction is ident a binomi coeffici and so is the second fraction .
and so we've discov that binomi combinatori ident , k plu j choos k time l choos k plu j is exactli l choos k time l minu k choos j .
thi look like just a trite , massag and a rewrit and i've got a product of the binomi coeffici to the left and i've got anoth product of the binomi coeffici to the right and it's not clear to us that we've gone ani further .
ha thi actual improv matter ?
ye , inde it ha .
the kei is thi .
on the left , the term j , which is the index for the sum , appear in both binomi coeffici .
on the right , it is sequest in on of them .
let's promptli put thi observ to good us .
our sum , the number of term contribut by the chosen omega to the right hand side of the inclus exclus formula can be rewritten as follow .
replac k plu j choos k time l choos k plu j by the ident we have just discov .
observ that the term l choos k doe not depend upon j as a constant , as far as thi summat is concern .
it can slide out of it's summat .
now take a look at what is left behind in the ruin of it's summat .
doe thi ring a bell ?
is there a faint atavist tug to your memori ?
if thi remind you of the binomi theorem , you ar on the right track .
rememb , what doe the binomi theorem sai ?
it sai someth about power of sum .
and a particular special of thi , <num> plu x to sum into the power m can be written in as a sum of binomi coeffici time power of x .
now compar the gener form of the binomi theorem with the express on the right hand side of the sum we ar look at .
if we identifi m with l minu k , that look like a binomi sum .
well , what is plai the role of x ?
halt by observ , it is minu <num> .
and so , immedi , we can write down the sum on the right as a power .
we get the right hand side is equal to l choos k time <num> plu , your x is a minu <num> .
so <num> plu minu <num> , the whole to the power l minu k .
but of cours , <num> plu minu <num> is exactli the same as <num> minu <num> , which is <num> .
and sinc l is bigger than k , you have zero to some posit power , you get zero .
and therefor , the entir right hand side devolv beautifulli into zero .
we've discov a combinatori ident and we can promptli put thi to good us in the set we were analyz .
so rememb , the question now wa when l is bigger than k , how mani term did the chosen omega contribut to on the right hand side of your inclus exclus sum ?
and now we can answer thi .
precis , noth .
thi is beauti .
let's now take talk of what we've done .
select ani k and hold it .
pick a particular sampl point , an omega , arbitrarili from the collect of sampl point .
now we're go to take thi omega and follow it trail , see what it is do .
thi omega resid in a set of number in the event a1 through an .
if omega resid in fewer than k of the event , it will contribut noth to the left or to the right .
if omega resid in more than k of these event , it will contribut , as we've just discov , noth to the left and noth to the right .
the onli time omega contribut is when omega isn't precis k of these event .
and in which case , it contribut onc to the left hand side and in fair and just fashion , onc to the right hand side .
thi is true for everi select of omega .
and in consequ , we discov the valid of the inclus exclus theorem .
when you look back at thi , you'll sai , well , i had to do some combinatori massag .
but the kei to the exercis wa the magician's exhort , pick a card , ani card .
pick a sampl point , ani sampl point and follow it trail .
the student could , should get us to do thi .
thi turn out to be a veri power , gener wai of approach probabilist problem , especi the advanc theori .
if noth els , it'll have a salutari benefit of firmli fix the underli sampl space of the problem firmli in your head .
and of cours , thi is the veri first thing you should have done .
what is a sampl space ?
pick a sampl point , then follow it trail .
so we now have a firm result , a result which tell us someth about a number of occurr .
cast in rather mysteri formul on the right hand side in term of intersect probabl for these event .
where doe thi turn out to be us ?
well , thi will be next .
we should investig the inclus exclus formula by look at specif case to build intuit for word like to be us for .
befor we launch in to calcul , it would be wise to step back and take a look at it from a vantag point , a philosoph vantag point as it were .
to see where thi is posit and where it is like to be us for .
on the left of the inclus exclus formula what i've got is the probabl of a sum .
what a comput is the distribut of the number of occurr of certain event .
so far so good .
that look like it might well be us in mani context .
what about the right hand side ?
that's where we have a formid look , altern sum .
the term of the sum on the other hand , involv intersect probabl .
and so , immedi from a philosoph point of view , thi suggest to us , that where inclus and exclus is most like to be profit is where the event ar independ or perhap , mildli depend .
in other word , the degre of depend is not too strong .
if that is the case , then we mai be in with a shout at comput these intersect probabl .
becaus you recal that independ is a rule of product .
intersect probabl devolv beautifulli when there's independ .
so thi suggest that we should start by look at independ case first .
follow the prescript of georg bool , we're go to look at the simplest of these case to see if we can understand where thi lead us .
and as we shall see , veri shortli , an old friend is go to resurfac from these concentr .
so , accordingli , let's start by special in event to famili .
a1 through an in some abstract probabl space .
let's special it to the case , where the event now ar independ .
let's make further simplif here .
and assum further that not onli ar these event independ , but thei all have the same mass .
thei all have the same probabl .
inevit , we'll call thi probabl , littl p .
now what doe inclus exclus tell us in such a set ?
now befor we dive into an analysi of the formul , let's take a look at the gener term on the right of the equat .
thei're go to sum in an altern fashion for a given valu k , the term sk , sk plu <num> , sk plu <num> and so forth .
the gener term on the right is of the form sk plu j .
now what doe the inclus exclus sum sk plu j plu portend ?
well , the formul is admittedli formid .
but in word , it's quit simpl to describ .
pick ani k plu j of the event a1 through an .
look at the intersect .
comput the probabl and sum such probabl over all choic of k plu j event from the collect .
okai .
now where doe thi lead us ?
the summand on the right deal with the probabl of an intersect .
independ is a rule of product .
and probabl of an intersect in thi case is go to be exactli the product of the individu probabl .
now there ar k plu j event in that intersect .
each of them by our assumpt , as got probabl p .
independ sai , we're go to multipli p by itself , k plu j time .
in other word , we're go to accumul further probabl , precis p to the power k plu j .
onc you've done that , everi probabl in that sum is equal to p to the power k plu j .
how mani term ar there in the sum ?
well , we have n event to start with and ar select all possibl for k plu j .
in other word , there ar exactli n choos k plu j term in the sum and each of the summand contribut exactli .
p to the power k plu j and there you go .
and the case where thing ar independ , the inclus exclus sum simplifi magic , beautifulli .
the proper vantag point frequent add a magic clariti to an otherwis dim and murki busi .
now let's dive into the formul .
so what do we have ?
we've got variou inclus exclus sum , which have got a particularli simpl binomi charact .
what ar we try to do with these ?
well , we're go to look at the indic for the variou event .
x<num> is the indic for a <num> , x<num> for a <num> , xj for a gener aj .
we ar go to look at the sum of these indic .
x1 plu x2 through xn is go to tell us how mani of the event occur , how that is precis the domain of the inclus exclus theorem .
the theorem tell us the probabl that precis k of a event a1 through an occur is given by an altern sum start at sk and then we , well , we need sk plu <num> and then sk plu <num> and so forth .
each of the term , sk plu j on the right ha got a simpl binomi formul .
let's promptli write it down .
and now , insid the sum , i've got someth , which look a littl forbid initi .
becaus i've got a product of two binomi coeffici , but that should look familiar .
we've seen someth like thi not veri long ago .
in fact , in the last video lectur , we saw precis a combinatori ident for a product of a binomi coeffici of thi form , when l wa some gener number bigger than k .
and if we select l to be n exactli , then we can just write down what we discov in our combinatori ident .
write thi product of binomi coeffici down as a differ format of binomi coeffici , thi time with j appear onli in on place .
let's plug it in .
and now , i'm go to do a littl bit of , let's call it housekeep .
i'm go to rearrang them and color code them .
first , observ , i've taken a product of two binomi coeffici and replac it by my combinatori ident .
next , i've taken p to the power k plu j and rewritten it as p to the power k time p to the power j .
and final , i've color code thing , blue and green .
the object be that i want to isol term that do not depend upon j , pull them out of the sum .
these ar the term in blue .
and identifi precis those thing in the sum , which ar go to devolv upon the choic of , of j .
now the term in blue , n choos k time p to the power of k , don't depend upon j .
thei can be pull right out of the sum .
let's promptli do thi .
the term in green insid the sum depend on j .
and of cours , thei cannot be pull out of the sum .
but there ar the form , minu <num> to a power j time p to the power j .
in other word , we have both term to power j .
let's combin them and write it simpli as minu p to the power j .
now take a good look at that sum on the right hand side .
doe thi look familiar ?
of cours , it doe .
thi is anoth instanc of the gener binomi theorem .
if you rememb , <num> plu x to the power m can be written as a sum of binomi coeffici time power of x .
if we identifi n in thi case with n minu k and we identifi x now with minu p , everyth is ripe for an automat applic of thi binomi theorem .
now let's properli do thi .
we get n choos k time p to the par k time <num> plu x replac by minu p is <num> plu minu p , the whole to the power n minu k .
now doe thi look familiar ?
assuredli , it doe .
thi is someth we've spent a lot of time plai with over the last coupl of week .
and you'll sai uh huh .
thi is a binomi distribut .
thi is exactli the binomi probabl attach to the number of success , k in n toss of a coin .
whose success probabl is p .
<num> minu p , of cours is a failur probabl .
we've , we've rediscov the binomi distribut , magic , beautifulli .
what you've just discov is that the number of occurr of the event , a1 through an .
in other word , the sum of indic x1 through xn is govern by a binomi distribut correspond to n toss of a coin , whose success probabl is p .
thi is love .
it is alwai gratifi to how old acquaint come back to us .
in retrospect , wa it surpris ?
when you think about it , it sai , what doe thi remind us of ?
of cours , of repeat , independ trial .
if we imagin that each of the event a1 through an , repres success or failur outcom for each of n coin toss , n distinct independ trial , then thi is precis the set .
and now of cours , it is not at all surpris that we've discov the binomi distribut .
what we comput in a number of event that occur is precis the number of success in toss of a coin and so the binomi ha emerg .
now thi is a lot of work to get to the binomi distribut and assuredli our earlier approach were much faster and much more to the point .
thei got us to the binomi distribut quickli and effici .
wa there ani worth in thi exercis ?
of cours , there wa .
the fact that the binomi distribut in marriag when you have independ in these event a1 through an is gratifi and is suggest that thi line of thought can now be extend beyond pure combinatori argument .
on that when he look a binomi , we develop the distribut from pure combinatori principl .
thi now tell us that if we go beyond the provenc of independ coin toss , if we go into a set where there is of depend , perhap not excess .
that thi formul is go to lead us to answer beyond the binomi to be sure , but perhap not too far from it .
and in particular , thi suggest that quantiti that emerg from the binomi might well hold on a much larger scope and scale .
and in particular , beauti approxim to the binomi distribut in the context of rare event that he discov in <num> when he wa talk about jurisprud in franc .
thi might well be someth that emerg and hold true more gener .
at ani rate , thi is well worth investig .
thi is up next .
in poisson's discoveri of <num> , we have found accident , as it were , a curiou littl approxim to the binomi .
though as we saw in the centuri and a half that follow , thi discoveri had entranc and unexpect effect .
and now through anoth vener artifact , the method of inclus and exclus , we find the binomi reappear again , accident , serendipit .
ar these discoveri then connect ?
the idea of the binomi to the poisson , is it part of a deeper phenomenon or wa it just mere serendip ?
well sure , we can't simpli dismiss it as accident without further investig .
and thi line of thought is go to lead us to the discoveri of a delic and beauti poisson siev .
to understand where thi aris , we should go back and review what we have discov in the case of the binomi .
so , the question now is what is at the heart of thi poisson approxim for the binomi ?
well , let's start with the simpler set for inclus and exclus where we have a collect of independ event and where everi event ha the same probabl p .
we promptli introduc the idea of an indic , which captur whenev an event occur .
and our discoveri wa that the inclus exclus formula promptli drop the binomi distribut into our lap .
the number of occurr of these independ event is govern by the binomi distribut with paramet n and p .
now , whenc the poisson distribut , where doe it aris ?
well of cours , we got the poisson through the binomi in the provinc of rare event .
so let's consid a situat where the event a1 through an , the bad event , as it were , ar rare .
what doe that mean ?
it mean the chanc of occurr of ani on of them , p , is small .
we're go to look at an asymptot regim , where n , the number of event , is quit larg .
so we have a lot of bad event , each with a small probabl of occurr .
and the expect number of the event that occur is a moder number , n time p , that we call lambda .
now , let us step through the inclus exclus argument again , veri quickli thi time , to get a feel for why thing work the wai thei did .
so we'll begin with the inclus exclus sum .
in thi case , the sum ar simpl to character , becaus the event ar independ .
and immedi we get a binomi coeffici time a power of p .
well , we simplifi the binomi coeffici .
write it out .
we find a fall factori in the numer , factori in the denomin .
but the fall factori ha got k plu j term , each of which is approxim n .
rememb , n is larg .
and we will want to look in a regim where k is rel small compar to n .
and in thi case , we discov that these inclus exclus sum appear to be of the form of a power of a fix paramet lambda divid by a factori .
so far so good .
thi is just pure algebra manipul and reassembl of term .
when we put it back into the inclus exclus formula , now someth interest and deep start to aris .
each of the inclus exclus sum now is the form of a , of a power over a factori .
we reassembl term , and we find on the right a sum , which look like an exponenti .
it's the old adag again .
if it walk like a duck , if it quack like a duck , it's got to be a duck .
if it walk like an exponenti , if it quack like an exponenti , it's got to be an exponenti .
that sum is an approxim to an exponenti function .
in fact , it's a truncat exponenti seri whose paramet is minu lambda .
and so , without further ado , we find a beauti approxim , a poisson approxim emerg out of the ruin .
accident ?
not so hasti .
what wa at the heart of thi discoveri ?
right , all of thi wa just algebra manipul , and someth beauti and unexpect drop into our lap .
we should sure look back and ask , where did thi come from ?
wa it pure accident ?
and when you trace it back , we discov that thi progress wa permit becaus the inclus exclus sum had a particular charact .
the inclus exclus sum were of the form of a power divid by a factori .
and whenc the power ?
of cours , the power aris , it's a product , it aris becaus of an underli independ .
thi wa a bounti of independ , and thi wa at the heart of the poisson approxim to the binomi .
the independ trial engend product , and that led to the inclus exclus sum be power of the factori .
and the moment you had that , the rest wa just simpl algebra calculu , just chug through the motion , as it were .
and out come an exponenti .
thi lead us now to suspect that the poisson discoveri wa not mere accident .
that the poisson is wait to be discov the moment we have event which ar independ , or perhap onli approxim independ .
and thi now essenti give us a beauti theorem which give us a poisson siev .
so let's write down what our discoveri is .
what we're go to do now is move into a gener framework where we have a system of event a1 through an .
think of them as bad event , rare event .
fortun these bad thing happen rare .
bad thing happen to good peopl onli veri , veri occasion .
so these ar the bad event .
we're go to think of these as go to be perhap not independ but perhap approxim independ , where the level of depend is not strong .
if that is the case , then we could hope for a power over a factori to emerg for the inclus exclus sum .
the moment you do that , everyth els will carri through without chang in toto .
so the kei here is a bounti of independ .
that inclus exclus sum look like the power of a fix quantiti divid by a factori .
the power is go to aris becaus the probabl of an intersect of thing which ar nearli independ should be a power , should be a product .
and if that is the case , the entir argument just carri through .
the number of bad event that occur , the number of rare event that occur , is cover by a poisson law .
and the expect of the poisson is exactli the paramet lambda which is appear in the power .
and in particular , the probabl that no bad event happen , a fortiori , is given by simpli an exponenti with expon minu lambda .
you see now the promin of where thi idea is , that thi is actual a siev is appear .
we have a lot of event , n , a lot of trial , if you will , which ar not perhap independ but close to be independ .
the level of depend is small in some formal sens .
given a larg number of bad event , how mani bad event actual occur ?
well , cover by the fix paramet , lambda .
and therefor , what we're realli do is metaphor strain through a collect of bad event and happen to catch a few .
thi is the idea , the metaphor idea of a siev .
what we have discov is a veri delic poisson siev for the problem .
of cours thi is the formal trap of the problem as it were .
but a slogan is alwai nice to have becaus it captur for us the essenc of a mathemat theorem , without , of cours , a great deal of precis .
so promptli , here is a slogan .
the number of bad event or rare event that occur is gener govern by a poisson law .
our next applic of the principl of inclus and exclus and thi delic poisson seat that we've discov is classic .
it's histor .
it goe back to the year <num> .
and de montmort wrote about thi , amongst other problem of hi era that he had consid .
thi on is call le problem de rencontr .
and , translat , it mean it's a problem of match .
i'm go to phrase it for you in it classic , whimsic statement .
i'll give you a statement .
perhap , a more sober reassess of what the problem realli is .
imagin a set where we have n individu and thei're all wear hat .
i don't know thi promptli date me becaus who wear hat these dai , but perhap , an ascot , but let's suppos that we have n individu wear n hat .
the hat ar taken off , shuffl , and hand back to the individu at random .
now , some question now aris out of thi .
on question could simpli be , if you hand back the hat at random , what ar the chanc that nobodi get their own hat back ?
and , a more nuanc version of thi question , what ar the chanc that exactli k out of n individu get their hat back ?
of cours , thi is pure whimsic .
i could imagin a group of sailor on shore leav who in a fit of play enter an establish and when thei leav just grab somebodi's hat , put it on and leav .
and , now , you've got a jumbl of hat .
if you want a more sober version of thi problem , imagin that you have n articl , each of which is associ with , let's sai a locat , a place , an .
if these articl ar alloc randomli , what ar the chanc that none of the articl goe to the intend locat ?
what ar the chanc a certain number , k of them , go to the intend locat ?
so , thi is sometim call a match problem .
so , now , let's jump in .
and , do an analysi of thi problem what is our start point ?
inevit , what is a sampl space for the problem ?
now , let's strip the problem of all the irrelev trap , hat and sailor and individu and so on and so forth .
what do we have at heart ?
we have n individu .
let's label them , give them name , on , two , three , up through n .
and , what do we have next ?
each of them is alloc a hat .
let's call the hat alloc to an individu <num> , pi  <num> .
the hat alloc to individu <num> , pi  <num> and so on .
the hat alloc to individu n , pi  n .
why pi  ?
we'll come to that in a moment why i chose thi particular nomenclatur .
so , the first person could perhap get the third hat , in which case pi  <num> stand for <num> .
the second person perhap got the eleventh hat , in which case pi  <num> is <num> .
and , perhap the last person got the second hat , in which case pi  n is <num> .
what can we discern about the number pi  <num> through pi  n ?
well , each of them is a number from <num> through n , and no two number ar the same .
the same heart can't go to two peopl .
in other word , we've discov that a sampl point of thi experi ar permut of the number <num> through n , and that explain the nomenclatur , why i chose pi  , for permut of cours .
each permut then give rise to a sampl point .
rememb to specifi a sampl point , you have to give me an object whose specif elimin all chanc connot for the problem .
the moment you tell me all the valu pi  <num> through pi  n , i know precis which hat each of the individu receiv , and there's noth now left to chanc .
and , therefor , these ar exactli the sampl on .
how mani permut ar there ?
well , natur in factori .
so , thi is a finit set .
but , the number of sampl point grow veri , veri , veri quickli becaus the factori function grow quit rabidli as it increas .
veri well , so , at least now we understand the sampl point ar veri simpl to character .
thei're given by permut of the number <num> through n .
what is our next question ?
oh , inevit , what is the probabl measur ?
and , of cours , in thi set , there is no reason to believ that ani on permut is to be favor over ani other permut .
and , therefor , we have a combinatori set , where , to each permut we alloc equal mass .
and , what is that mass ?
well , the reciproc of the number of term that ar in the sampl space , the size of the sampl space .
in other word , each permut is alloc atom mass <num> over n vector .
so far , so good .
thi wa not veri hard at all .
but , of cours , the next question , the million dollar question , what ar the event of interest ?
well , natur , whether the individu get their hat or not .
so , let's promptli put in place some , some terminolog , some notat here .
let a sub on denot the event that the first individu got hi hat back .
in other word , pi  <num> is <num> .
let a2 be the event that the second individu got hi hat back .
and , gener , let a sub j be the event that the jth individu got hi hat back .
we should veri quickli take stock for a moment .
what is an event ?
well , an event is a subset of the sampl space .
what ar the sampl space ?
well , system of permut .
what n is the event aj ?
aj , then , correspond to that subset of permut where the j at the element of the permut wa j itself .
in other word , the hat got spread out , but the j of hat stai where it belong .
all the other hat could be assign willi nilli in ani wai whatsoev .
and , therefor , we identifi with the event aj , those permut where the jth element of the permut wa j itself .
okai , thi is clean and simpl .
now , we're make progress here .
befor we try to do an analysi , we should take a step back as it were and take a look at the situat that is develop .
these event ar quit simpl to character individu .
the event seem to have a certain symmetri properti .
that is , everi individu , as far as their hat ar concern , ha the same look at the situat in some loos sens that everi other individu doe .
the random alloc of hat is confer symmetri upon the problem .
but , these event ar not independ .
and , to see why thi is the case , all we have to do is consid the simplest of the set where , sai , n is <num> .
if you onli had two individu , then , if the first individu get hi hat , in other word , a1 occur .
that forc that the second individu also get their hat .
in other word , when you have two individu , know a1 tell you everyth about a2 .
of cours , so these event ar now tightli coupl togeth .
the save grace here is go to be the follow , that if we have a larg number of individu .
then sai someth about on of them ha a veri modest , perhap neglig effect on what happen to the other .
in other word , we're go to discov that these event ar onli weakli depend .
and that is go to set the stage for the emerg of what poisson said .
but we ar get ahead of ourselv .
so , let's put in place some more terminolog , some more notat .
let's promptli write down x sub j to be the indic for the event aj .
x sub j is <num> , precis when the jth individu get hi hat and <num> otherwis .
and the event that we ar interest in .
first , that nobodi get their hat .
well , a1 doe not get hi hat if the event a1 complement occur .
a2 doesn't get hi hat if the event a2 complement occur , and so on .
the event that nobodi get a hat , of cours , is the intersect of the complement of each of these event aj .
in term of the indic variabl thi sai that the sum of the indic is sadli <num> .
a more nuanc version of thi is when the sum of indic take a given valu k .
if thi occur , then precis k individu get their hat .
and , of cours , we'd like to try to comput such probabl .
so , let's start .
natur , our first question now is , can we set up a proper inclus exclus formul ?
and for thi , we're go to have to take a look at the inclus exclus sum .
georg bool would recommend that we start with the simplest version of the problem that we don't yet understand .
and follow hi sage advic , yet onc again , let's start with the simplest of the inclus exclus sum , that correspond to a singl event .
what can be said with the first term ?
so pick a gener event , let's sai a1 .
what is the probabl that a1 occur ?
rememb , a1 wa the event that the first individu got hi hat back .
it is random alloc .
of cours , thi is the probabl of that subset of n tupl where the first element is lock in at <num> .
and all the other can be anyth els thei want .
how do we comput thi ?
well , the continu of the event a1 , the size of the event a1 , the number of permeat that trigger a1 is easi enough to character .
rememb , the first element is fix at <num> .
the first hat goe back to it owner .
but then you have n minu <num> remain hat to alloc , and thei can alloc willi nilli .
so there ar exactli n minu <num> factori sampl point in the event a1 .
out of a total of n factori sampl point , we have a common factori set , and therefor the ratio black out as it must to <num> over n .
the first individu ha a chanc <num> over n of get hi hat back .
of cours , the moment you , you run down thi particular analysi , it's clear that exactli the same analysi work for ani individu .
the probabl that a2 get hi hat to the game , <num> in n , becaus the second element of the permut is held fix and the remain n minu <num> element ar allow to vari .
and so on for ani individu .
and therefor the inclus exclus sum , s1 , correspond to singleton is simplic itself .
there ar n possibl for the singleton , n wai of select the individu who you're look at .
for each such individu , the chanc of get hi hat back is <num> over n and therefor , the first term in the inclus exclus formul s<num> is exactli <num> .
okai , thi wa perhap too simpl .
we should look at a slightli more complex set to see how we can settl our intuit .
so , let's look at the , the case of the second term in the inclus exclus sum .
thi is go to requir pairwis intersect probabl , and let's start with on for definit .
let look at the first two individu , on and two .
what is the chanc that both of them get their hat back ?
what is the probabl of a1 intersect a2 ?
what doe that event mean ?
well , it mean that we're look at all subset of permut , where the first two element in the permut ar fix .
the first element ha to be <num> , the second element ha to be <num> , and the remain element can vari arbitrarili .
and therefor a1 intersect a2 ha got exactli n minu <num> factori element in it .
and therefor the probabl of of thi event is n minu <num> factori divid by n factori , and that give you the reciproc of n time n minu on .
and some of you might recogn that in the denomin what i realli have is a fall factori .
it is n to the two folli .
okai , a fanci wai of describ a simpl object , but bear with me .
okai .
now onc you've done thi , it now becom clear what we have to do .
the second inclus exclus sum , s2 , sum over all pairwis intersect , but everi pairwis intersect behav exactli like a1 intersect a2 .
each of them ha exactli the same probabl of occurr .
and therefor s2 is the number of pair , n choos <num> time the probabl that ani particular pair of hat is return .
and thi give us <num> over <num> , half <num> over <num> factori .
have seen the case or the first and second term in the inclus exclus sum , we're now come to a right understand of how thi thing is go to plai out .
let's veri quickli jump forward to a gener term , sai the jth inclus exclus sum .
mean that thei ar go to look at j wise intersect of the event at hand .
the event be , of cours , that the individu get their hat .
let's pick on particular j wise intersect for definit , so we can get an understand of how thi thing is go to plai out .
so let sai that we pick sailor , <num> , <num> , <num> , up until j , individu <num> through j .
and ask , what is the chanc that all of them get their hat back ?
what is the probabl that these j specifi individu get their hat back , <num> through j ?
the stori now is clear becaus thi mean the intersect of a1 through aj correspond to exactli the follow event .
all those permut where the first j element ar fix .
the first element ha to be <num> , the second element ha to be <num> .
the jth element ha to be j .
and the last n minu j element , can be anyth thei want .
and so thi immedi give rise , so a probabl given by n minu j factori over n factori , .
cancel common term in numer and denomin and we discov a fall factori in the denomin .
the probabl that j specifi individu get their hat back is the reciproc of the fall factori n to the j fall .
with thi in hand , we ar readi for the jth inclus exclus sum , let's just write it down .
again , the symmetri in the problem tell us that these probabl ar unaffect by whichev group of j individu you choos to look at .
there ar n choos j such group of individu and therefor the jth inclus exclus sum fact out to be simpli , elegantli , beautifulli <num> over j factori .
we can't realli have hope for anyth much cleaner than thi especi when we start out the set .
where there wa a worri that the lack of independ in the event a1 through an wa go to caus troubl .
no matter , we've got a simpl reciproc factori captur these inclus exclus sum that's promptli put it all togeth .
let's begin with the simplest question , what is the chanc that none of the individu get their hat back ?
so rememb , a1 complement is the event that the first individu doe not get hi hat back .
a2 complement the event sadli that the second individu doe not get hi hat back .
a n complement the event that the nth individu doe not get hi hat back .
the probabl of intersect of all of these is given by the basic inclus exclus altern sum .
we promptli put in our recip for factori in here and now we're got a plain and simpl express .
s0 is <num> by definit .
s<num> is also <num> but we're go to write it as <num> over <num> factori .
and then we have a <num> over <num> factori , a <num> over <num> factori and so on with altern sign in front of them .
doe that remind us of someth , of cours the number we have these factori in the denomin .
that is go to start suggest an exponenti function in which case we ar look at a power in the numer .
well , what is a power ?
oh , thi is the simplest of possibl we ar simpli take neg <num> to integ power .
minu <num> to the power <num> is <num> .
minu <num> to the power <num> is minu <num> .
minu <num> to the power <num> is plu <num> .
and so neg <num> to integ power is go to give you altern pluss and minus .
and so what you've got is a truncat exponenti seri whose expon whose paramet is minu <num> .
but the factori in the denomin tell us that thi seri is go to converg fearfulli fast .
and therefor , these truncat ar alreadi go to be veri , veri close to their limit object .
and therefor , what is the limit object ?
it is just e to the power minu <num> .
veri approxim <num> .
in word , the chanc that nobodi get's hi hat back is approxim <num> 3ds , is the power minu <num> if you want to be more precis .
and thi approxim is good even for veri small valu of n becaus of these factori in the denomin .
even for an equal to <num> , <num> or <num> you'll find that the approxim minu <num> is veri , veri close to the actual inclus exclus altern form that i have .
and so we've discov someth beauti , there's a slogan that de montmort discov in <num> .
the probabl of the obvers of thi event .
the probabl that at least on individu get hi hat back is approxim two in three .
<num> minu e to power of minu <num> and thi is almost independ of the number of peopl that you're look at .
even for veri small you're go to get thi as a veri good approxim .
thi is unexpect perhap , like that is wow , that is neat .
i , i didn't quit anticip thi , especi if we have a larg haggl of sailor and you're toss hat to them at random .
wouldn't anticip that someth so simpl and eleg pop out of thi by look at an asymptot analysi .
let's look a more gentl case and it's not go to be ani much harder at all .
so let's just but these inclus exclus sum togeth .
what's the probabl that exactli k individu get hat ?
we've got you inclus exclus altern formul .
plug in the fact that these inclus exclus sum ar reciproc factori there now is just a question of algebra .
write it all out , you find that variou term cancel in the numer , denomin .
put it all togeth , we find that everi on of these term ha got a reciproc k factori in it .
factor it out , and then insid the round bracket you discov , now wait minut , i've just found a truncat exponenti seri again .
and that entir thing in the round bracket is go to be approxim e to the power minu <num> and therefor .
there we go , bob's your uncl .
the probabl that k out of n individu get their hat and nobodi els doe is approxim e to the power of minu <num> divid by k factori .
and thi result is go to be valid almost independ of the size of the , you know , veri modest small valu ar there .
now , the wai i've develop it , it look accident but of cours it's not accident .
becaus we realiz , wait a minut , let's take a look at what those inclus exclus sum realli ar .
thei're of the form of a reciproc factori , <num> over j factori , okai ?
but <num> is the same as <num> to the power j so what we've got is these inclus exclus sum ar the form of a fix number to a power <num> to a power divid by a factori .
but thi is exactli the provinc of the cross on set and so here's our slogan .
the number of individu who receiv your hat even for modest valu of n is cover by a poisson law with expect <num> .
i ask you to step back and savor such a beauti and eleg result which emerg so unexpectedli from what look like a complic mix and mess of a problem .
thi also point out why we ar realli do a metaphor siev .
a lot of individu don't get their hat back .
in fact , most individu don't .
the chanc of get your hat back , in from modest valu of n is quit small it's onli <num> in n .
thi is a rare event and what govern the number of rare event that occur ?
it is a poisson distribut and in thi case a poisson distribut with expect unit .
let me go on and give you anoth classic exampl .
i must apolog in advanc , i'm feel whimsic todai .
thi is go to be our next lectur .
i must confess to a certain amount of whimsi and indisciplin when i wa creat thi portion of the lectur .
the imag you see on screen ar playbil for the <num> gilbert and sullivan comic opera that were produc between the year <num> and <num> .
these were written by the great comic librettist william frank gilbert and the music's call ar arrang by arthur sullivan .
and of cours you know now that gilbert and sullivan oper as .
i must confess that i actual had a more portent exampl in mind to creat for you todai .
but on of my daughter call me out when i wa prepar the lectur and said oh , you're not realli prepar a lectur .
you're actual plai and look at thi gilbert and sullivan playbil .
thi is true i , thi wa indisciplin on my part .
i plai hooki and i start look at these playbil's from over the internet .
i happen to be a huge gilbert and sullivan fan and so ye , i wa be indisciplin .
but have done thi , i've got these playbil's up on my comput screen , i said well i've got to justifi the invest in time .
so i chang my mind and i decid to creat an applic where casei's playbil come into plai in the context of thi poisson siev that we've been talk about .
so if you'll indulg me , there's a littl bit of a muser here , .
thi is go to be relat to a anoth classic and beauti problem which ha a caus in subtl modern applic .
so let me give you a clean version of the problem .
thi is call the coupon collector's problem .
and let me put thi in the context of the gilbert and sullivan playbil in the follow light .
let us sai that , a novelti manufactur perhap in london , face with fall sale of hi novelti item .
the site ar try to capit on a feel of nostalgia current in the popul at thi time .
and to incit peopl to bui hi novelti good , he inset with each good , a coupon , a playbil of an origin gilbert and sullivan opera .
these playbil ar chosen at random and insert into these piec of merchandis that he purchas .
of cours , an emot public flock to thi manufactur and start bui these novelti gadget in larg number hope to collect all the origin gilbert and sullivan playbil .
of cours , we want to properli abstract awai the , the trap of thi problem .
imagin that and so these playbil we have n coupon in collect .
of cours , these could be the gilbert and sullivan playbil but , you know i could replac them by anyth els that strike your fanci .
gi joe figurin , basebal card , cricket card , imag of soccer player , footbal player , what have you .
you have n coupon and coupon ar select randomli and insert into merchandis .
when you purchas a piec of merchandis you hurriedli open it and see what coupon is insid it .
now , what is your object ?
of cours , you'd like to get all the coupon , you'd like to get all the playbil , all the figurin , all the basebal card .
now , let us sai that in your first flash of enthusiasm you go and bui not just on or two or three piec of merchandis , you bui let's sai t unit of merchandis .
and now our question ar go to be relat to if you bui t piec of merchandis .
how mani distinct playbil , coupon , figurin , did he manag to collect in that time ?
of cours , the luck of the game would mean that , that you pick up some particular coupon .
and then in sever other purchas , you happen to get the same coupon .
bad luck but if you purchas enough piec of merchandis then with luck you will eventu get all the coupon on most of them .
so , how mani distinct coupon do we get after t purchas ?
of cours , we discount multipl of the coupon .
we want distinct individu coupon , how mani ?
oh , here's anoth question , if you realli ar insist upon collect all the n coupon .
how mani purchas do you need to make befor you can do thi ?
of cours , thi look like an amus littl problem of no great moment .
but nonetheless , it give us a beauti vehicl for investig what ar sub strata our theori lead us toward ?
of cours , it's a chanc game we've simplifi the problem .
we assum that all the coupon ar equal like and each of them is equal like of distribut into ani given particular piec of merchandis .
that the manufactur ha got an infinit suppli of these coupon avail , so he can keep put coupon in without denud hi suppli .
and what of the chanc experi here ?
well , natur enough our veri first question is go to be inevit , what is the sampl space for the problem ?
and the moment you do thi you realiz .
well , what have i done ?
i've purchas t piec of merchandis with each piec of merchandis i pick up a coupon , a playbil .
the entir chanc experi is complet specifi as far as our interest ar concern in the particular coupon that you pick up in your t purchas .
in other word , the sampl point ar go to be adequ describ by a t tupl of integ .
label the coupon <num> to n and specifi a team tupl where each of the element k1 , k2 , k3 through k17 repres number from <num> through n .
thei repres which coupon you got on which purchas .
and thi ensembl of purchas tell you all the coupon you've acquir over t purchas .
of cours , there could be duplic of coupon in these purchas .
so , sampl is implicitli here with replac from an underli popul , thing can be repeat .
all right , now we've got a t tupl of coupon sampl with replac .
what ar the underli probabl measur ?
actual , inevit it's go to be combinatori .
everi t tupl ha the same chanc as everi other t tupl .
but look at our gain , what ar we do here ?
we're select a coupon at random for the first purchas , that's what we get .
we're select a coupon independ at random for the second purchas , independ at random for the third purchas , for the th purchas .
we've got a set of repeat independ trial .
of cours , thi is go to make it veri easi .
the combinatori measur is go to place equal mass on these object .
each of the coupon ha got a chanc <num> in n of be select on each trial .
therefor , a given select of coupon ha got probabl .
all right , independ we have a product measur <num> over n to the power t or simpli the reciproc of n to the power t .
excel , what now ar the even at hand ?
let's take a good look at thi .
natur , the event of interest ar whether i acquir the first coupon , or the second coupon , or the third coupon , and so forth , over t purchas .
what is the bad event ?
that i don't acquir a particular coupon after those t purchas .
so let's promptli give it a name .
let a1 be the sad , unfortun event that after t purchas expend , i have not acquir the first coupon .
let a2 be the event that after t purchas i have not acquir the second coupon .
gener , aj the event that after t purchas i have not acquir the jth coupon .
now , we could write down a subset of a sampl space , correspond to thi , but i am not go to do thi becaus now it's clear what we're go to need .
a sub j is the event , compris of all of those t tupl , of integ from <num> through n where none of the element in the t tupl is j , becaus if you did , then you'd have acquir the jth coupon .
so you're look at all t tupl where you avoid j .
let's promptli put in place an indic for thi unfortun , sorri event .
let x sub j be the indic for the event aj .
x sub j is <num> mean that in t purchas you have not acquir coupon j .
now , with these basic event , what ar the gener event of interest to us ?
well , the first event is that in t purchas i am lucki enough to get everi on of the coupon , the playbil , that i'm hope to collect .
the event that i get coupon <num> is a<num> complement .
the event that i acquir coupon <num> in t purchas is a2 complement , and so on .
and therefor , the event of interest is the intersect of these complement .
thi is a good event .
the event a1 a2 ar the bad event .
the complement ar the good event .
and i'd love dearli to figur out , what ar the chanc of the good event occur , that i get all the coupon ?
in term of the indic , thi is the equival to the event that the sum of indic is <num> .
if the sum of the indic is <num> , that mean that none of the bad event happen , which mean i've manag to acquir all the coupon .
and more gener of cours , we'd like to know the chanc of not acquir sai , k coupon , out of the n .
and thi is then the event at hand , where the sum of the indic is exactli k .
befor we launch into the analysi , it's not go to be hard , okai .
but it's go to requir set it up carefulli .
let's take stock of these event , all right ?
individu , the event seem to be fairli easi to character .
the difficulti , of cours , is that these event ar not independ .
if you've acquir the first coupon , then you know that at least on of the purchas cannot be alloc to the second coupon .
and perhap more if the first coupon were duplic or triplic , which mean that we have fewer chanc to get the next coupon .
and each new coupon you acquir reduc the chanc of acquir the remain coupon .
event ar sadli depend .
but we also anticip that the level of depend is not signific .
and thi as we shall see , will inde be the case .
thing ar all set up for an inclus exclus argument .
so let's promptli set thi thing up .
we want to figur out the inclus exclus sum , s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 .
and let's start with the simplest case again to settl intuit the veri first term .
what doe thi involv ?
thi involv figur out the probabl that a particular coupon is not acquir .
let's pick the first coupon .
what is the chanc that in t purchas , we do not acquir the first coupon ?
well , the veri first gilbert and sullivan opera wa thespi .
what is the chanc we don't get the playbil for thespi ?
well , thi is easi enough to figur out .
thi mean that we're look at t tupl of purchas where none of the element in the t tupl is <num> .
the probabl that a particular purchas land the first element is <num> in n .
the probabl that a particular purchas doe not land the first coupon is <num> minu <num> in n , an elementari us of addit .
by independ trial , the probabl that in t independ trial we do not acquir the first coupon is <num> minu <num> over n to the power t .
of cours thi argument is impecc for ani of the coupon by the symmetri inher in the problem .
and therefor , the first inclus exclus sum , s1 , is simpli n time <num> minu the reciproc of n to the power t .
we're not go to try to simplifi it at thi point .
let's build more ammunit befor you come back and sai well what is thi strang thing behav like ?
what can we sai about the second term ?
well pick two gener coupon , let's sai on and two .
what ar the chanc that we ar unlucki enough to not acquir either on or two in t trial ?
that is the probabl of a1 intersect a2 .
well , that mean the chanc of acquir on a given purchas on or the other of these two coupon is <num> in n .
the chanc of not acquir either of them is <num> minu <num> in n .
and the chanc of not acquir other of them over t independ trial is <num> minu <num> over n to the power t .
again , the calcul ar impecc for ani pair of coupon .
and therefor , the second inclus exclus sum , s2 , is given simpli by n choos <num> time <num> minu <num> over n to the power of t .
or in term of the follow factori notat , n to the <num> fall over <num> factori time <num> minu <num> over n to the power t .
and now we're all set .
what ar the jth term ?
pick ani j coupon , so for definit , the first j coupon .
what is the chanc that in t purchas none of first j coupon ar acquir .
and now we know exactli how thi is go to go .
the chanc that on a given trial , none of those first j coupon is acquir is <num> minu j over n .
the chanc that thi unhappi event happen in t independ purchas in a row is <num> minu j over n to the power t .
and therefor , the correspond inclus exclus sum , s sub j is simpli n choos j time thi quantiti .
and we'll simpli write it out in fall factori notat as n to the j fall over j factori time <num> minu j over n to the power t .
now , we understand the gener term .
it's a littl more complex than what we saw for the , but no matter .
it's still an elementari function form .
and with luck , if we ar good and sai our prayer at night , thi might fall into our lap in some nice and compact wai .
let's take a look .
so we want to look at the inclus exclus sum , and we've got an explicit formula for it .
admittedli , it look more cumbrou than we would like but let's take a look at the power .
t is some fix number , i'm go to hold that for the time be .
n , i'm go to think of as a larg number , a larg number of coupon .
so , what i've got is , <num> minu some constant j over a larg quantiti to a given power .
have i seen anyth like thi befor ?
mayb in an elementari calculu class .
have you scratch about in your memori bag ?
you might actual stumbl upon the follow observ .
thi actual look like an exponenti .
rememb , that if you look at <num> minu x over n , the whole thing to the power n .
think of x as someth fix and n as larg , and the limit as n goe to infin , that quantiti goe to e to the power minu x .
in fact , on could us thi as a definit of exponenti function as on of the altern wai of defin it .
okai , so here's a fact from calculu .
now , i've got someth which is reminisc of thi , except i don't seem to have a power n in the power .
let's simpli add it in there by multipli and divid by n .
now what do we have ?
well , we have the binomi coeffici in front <num> minu j over n to the power n time t over n .
to the power n , we can now approxim by an exponenti function with an expon minu j .
and then we're go to have to take the whole thing to the power t over n , to make up for the extra term how to add and there we go .
now you take a look at thi and sai , well veri good , it's an approxim to be sure , but it's go to be pretti good for larg n .
we now have someth in the numer which look like a power of j .
either the j fall is go to be approxim enter of our j for larg n and modest j .
and then we have an e to the minu t over n to the power j .
well let's group the power j's togeth , pure algebra .
and now in the numer , in their own bracket we have n time e to the minu t over n .
the whole to the power j in the denomin , we have j factori .
now , a student might well be forgiven for sai , okai , here's where you algebr manipul and strang thing ar happen and i don't see where thi is go .
but at the end of all of thi when the dust ha settl , what have we done ?
an inclus exclus sum on the left is approxim by a power over a factori .
you sai , oh wait a minut , that's exactli what the poisson siev requir .
let's formul thi .
if the thing in the numer in their own bracket on the right , if that behav like a constant sai louder , then i've got exactli a poisson siev paradigm .
and here we go .
if n time e to the minu t over n is some given constant lambda , rememb what do we have that you can plai with here ?
well , we can plai with a number of purchas t .
rememb n is some larg but fix quantiti , we can plai with the lambda that's a constant i can choos .
if i'm go to plai with a number of purchas , then let's rewrit thi express in term of t .
by take logarithm of the two side and then reassembl thing , i find that t is n time logarithm of n over lambda , the logarithm is to the natur or napier base .
if a number of purchas satisfi n time logarithm of n over lambda or the nearest integ to it , then the inclus exclus sum sj behav like a power of lambda over a factori .
and bingo , we've got it , we've got a poisson siev .
now if thi is the case , let's quickli run through the calcul and then run , run the slide over what we've discov .
what would be the probabl that we acquir everi q point ?
thi is the good event .
well that's an inclus exclus sum , but the poisson siev is go to tell us that thi is go to behav like e to the minu lambda .
if t satisfi n time log of n over lambda then the chanc of get all the coupon in your t purchas is approxim e to the power of minu lambda .
of cours , becaus i'm greedi , i want to have a high chanc of get all my purchas .
thi e to the power of minu lambda stand in the role of a confid paramet .
i would like it to be high , near on , that give me a lot of confid that with thi mani purchas , i've got greedili all <num> gilbert and sullivan playbil .
let's take a look at what it sai more gener .
what ar the chanc that exactli k of the playbil stubbornli refus to be obtain in my t purchas ?
so at t purchas i have acquir n minu k of the playbil but there ar k of them which i have not sadli been abl to get .
the poisson siev tell us immedi that thi is go to be approxim e to the power minu lambda time lambda to the power k over k factori .
let's put some number on thi just to settl the concept .
at thi level , we should take a look at thi and sai , i have a problem which wa not veri complex in statement .
the analysi wa tricki and end up with inscrut sum which i had no feel for but the poisson siev sai each of these sum behav like thi veri simpl poisson charact .
and that can immedi now allow us to draw conclus from thi .
so let us sai that i want a <num> chanc of get all the playbil .
there ar <num> playbil at hand , how mani purchas do i need ?
of cours that's the million dollar question .
how much monei am i go to wast in search for thi will o' the wisp ?
if i want a <num> confid , then i want my e to the power of minu lambda to be abov <num> or lambda to be about <num> .
and if lambda is <num> then the number of purchas is t , per our beauti simpl prescript , should be n time log of n over lambda , n is <num> , lambda is about <num> .
and you find that i need about <num> purchas to guarante with a <num> confid that i've acquir all <num> origin playbil .
what if i want a much higher degre of confid , though i am a gilbert and sullivan fanat ?
i realli want all of them , what if i want a <num> chanc ?
how larg will t have to be ?
if my confid e to the power minu lambda ha to be <num> . <num> then lambda is <num> . <num> .
t , n time log of n over lambda with n <num> , lambda now <num> . <num> , now clock in at <num> .
i'm go to have to pai a price if i want an incred high confid .
i'm go to have to bui a lot of playbil .
and of cours , of the last veri mani of the merchandis piec i'm , i'm purchas ar all hunt for the last elus playbil .
and as you know from your experi , the last item that you haven't got yet is go to take you the most time .
and that's where we've got to expend our time .
so if i want a <num> confid to get <num> item , i'm go to have to bui more than a hundr piec of merchandis .
admittedli , thi is a littl whimsic and i must apolog for my indisciplin .
i want to show you someth weighti and portent and bore , internet secur .
but i thought , thi is fun and i couldn't resist it and it tell a stori .
and it show you how we can implement the inclus exclus idea elegantli and simpli .
thi conclud thi lectur and now we'll go on to summar what we've discov in thi last tableau .
and in the summari , i'll then show you where these discoveri lead todai and to the kind of rich applic that thei inform .
summari of tableau <num> , a potpourri of titil applic , part two .
rare event and probabl siev ponder exist , , and the coupon collector .
we begin thi by go back to a basic , appar tri prob , probabl , a probabl measur that i want to and discov that a new perspect engend subtleti and nuanc which wa complet unsuspect .
modern tenac gave us bool's inequ and out of bool's inequ come thi eleg idea of a siev .
if i have a collect of event , a1 through an , which i'm go to think of as bad event , if the sum of the event probabl is strictli less than <num> .
than can conclud that there exist occurr of good event .
we can deduc exist from a veri , veri , veri simpl test .
we saw how in the context of a two color of a ball it alreadi gave us non trivial inform .
but admittedli , thi is a crude siev .
we discov a much more delic , nuanc siev by turf through an inclus exclus paradigm .
now , the crux of thi paradigm depend upon these inclus exclus sum .
and admittedli , thei look formid .
but when you stare at them long enough , it becom clear that thei ar actual ar sai someth veri reason and intuit .
and algebra , perhap not realli that complex .
each of these inclus , inclus sum ar look at probabl of intersect .
and thi immedi suggest to a natur provinc where thi kind of , of methodolog is like to be profit .
intersect probabl ar easi to comput when we have independ but perhap also when we have near independ .
and so can we find independ run right through thi .
so , if we have event for which conjunct probabl ar not difficult to comput , then we can put togeth an inclus exclus frame work and of cours at thi level , we've got an exact answer .
but , it's not veri intuit , is it ?
it's an ugli , altern sum .
it's not clear what it sai to us .
thing becom complet transpar when there is actual no interdepend .
when the inclus exclus sum behav like the ratio of a power to a factoid .
now where do the power come in , and that suggest where the independ is bake into the cake , or the near independ .
if you have thing which ar vagu , nearli independ , then the inclus exclus sum ar go to behav like power of the vectori .
and the moment that happen , we find the poisson distribut emerg , beautifulli .
out of the framework .
so now we sai that thi appar accident discoveri of poisson in <num> wa not so much of an accid after all .
it aris out of these independ or near independ trial .
and so now we have a brand new perspect of where the poisson emerg .
we promptli put thi to good us .
we saw how we could us thi poisson's siev formul to look at the poisson approxim to the binomi .
we saw how poisson's siev that in the problem in the wrong conch , the match problem of the model .
and we saw how thi formul work in the coupon collector's problem .
you would sai well , these all look like fairli modest applic , with the binomi perhap except .
do we have ani read solid weighti applic out of all of thi ?
inde we do .
ok , so let me just sketch out domain of where you see .
the poisson siev work beautifulli , glorious .
in on set , a start of model of brain function and among other thing we could ask well look , i rememb individu by how their facial featur look .
if i see a photograph of somebodi after some year , i might well , feel oh wait there there's a tug in my memori , i think i recogn them .
but , mayb there ar some error in recal .
if we lucki we don't make too mani error .
at a high level , you think about a function organ like thi , or at least a model of a function organ like a brain .
as a comput devic , which is produc result , where there ar a few rare error .
and the moment we have thi we sai oh mayb there's a poisson paradigm which is embed in here .
and inde there is right .
in suitabl mortal we can argu that the number of error is roughli govern by poisson distribut .
and again , it come out of the person save .
anoth set , if we take some imag veri similar to all of us , mobil telephoni , satellit commun .
of cours , a bane of modern life is that fact that our mobil devic sometim drop our call rude , unanticipatedli , unexpectedli .
of cours , if too mani call ar drop , then we get angri and we get furiou .
and we switch our servic provid .
we find anoth compani .
so there's an incent for all the telecommun compani to provid a high level of perform , so that peopl don't get distress and angri with them .
and if you're see thi , with good luck and good manag it could well be the case that rel few call ar drop .
drop a call is a rare event .
what categor the number of these outag , these drop ?
whether it's for about film .
oh it is for an internet router drop packet .
or if it's for satellit commun , commun imag from mar , where some bit ar scrambl in an imag .
well , with luck , these error ar all rare , and therefor can we anticip a forsworn paradigm come into plai ?
and inde it doe perhap .
even more modern applic .
in the modern dai , technolog ha progress to the point where we can creat larg number of veri small sensor , sens all kind of thing that we're interest in .
thing like climat , pressur , temperatur .
of newton , and we can creat larg number of these sensor at veri low cost , and so thi give us now a new wai of try to actual monitor thing in our environ .
well , let's sai that we're out , we're worri about the , the consequ of pollut in farm land .
imagin , with a crop duster airplan , fly over a larg field where there there is irrig .
and you're drop sensor all over the field at random .
each sensor check for certain pollut , certain chemic contamin .
now the , these sensor can collect inform , and then thei send inform out .
and if ani of the sensor or a group of them sai there ar pollut that we know we have an issu and then we can go ahead and deal with it .
activ manag will not be need .
and of cours thi creat new issu .
you see becaus if you're go to creat veri tini sensor .
if the sensor detect anyth , there's got to be a mechan by which it can get the inform out to the individu monitor the situat .
how doe a sensor get the inform out ?
well , it can't simpli sai , pack up my bag and walk down , out to the edg of field and sai , oh by the wai there wa a problem there .
a sensor can't do that .
how doe it do it ?
well the sensor doe it by broadcast the inform us telemetri , electromagnetri .
in other word , thei got how to equip the sensor with antenna and batteri .
but the sensor is veri tini .
it is impract to put a larg clunki batteri on it .
so the boundari ar limit in power , which mean that rang over which a sens i can commun is also limit .
all right , if that is the case , how do you get the inform out ?
well , perhap be collabor .
a sensor , me , i , detect someth wrong .
and i sort of rich it becaus i've got a veri small voic , just broadcast in my local vicin .
gui , gui , i've got a problem , i've got a problem , i've got a problem .
and these mutter ar seen by neighbor sensor .
thei pick it up and pass it on .
and , if you keep do thi eventu with luck , and good manag , and good network protocol , you might find the , the inform emerg from the field to some monitor devic on the peripheri .
i'm give you veri styliz wai of think about thi problem .
and now we can see we can mayb get the inform out , but thi now beg a mathemat question .
if by a sort of ar to eventu be taken out of the field , then somebodi ha to be abl to hear me .
there's got to be a sensor , a person or individu , an antenna batteri in my near vicin .
if i throw in too few sensor , then i'm go to lose that .
so , thi sai , i need to analyz how mani sensor i need to throw out there , so that , everi sensor is connect to a neighbor sensor , and that the entir assemblag form a connect network of commun entiti .
thi is a coverag problem .
in the classic theori of advanc probabl , it's call a mosaic process , all right ?
imagin that each transfer can see in the small region around it , all right ?
it's someth like somebodi is paint a room but the painter is veri messi , so he keep drop big blob of paint on the floor .
hopefulli none of the blob is veri big , okai ?
thi is a small pilot antenna , right ?
but if you threw enough blob , then the whole floor would get cover by connect blob .
okai , here is a set for a mosaic process .
we ar talk about when will it all be connect so i can get inform out ?
the analyt question here is go to be then .
what is the chanc that it will have sens , that on sens is isol if thei have a small weight as a commun .
thi with luck is a right event and if through enough sens then the chanc of somebodi get isol is rare .
how mani sensor ar isol .
how mani blob ar stuck on their own without connect blob ?
well it should be cover by a poisson paradigm .
we have a small number of error and thei're rare .
and thei ar approxim independ of each other .
not quit .
there's a level of depend , but with luck it is weak .
and of cours we can analyz thi .
well of cours you understand that analyz set like thi is go to requir correspondingli more and more formid algebra machineri , and i will not do that here .
thi wa to give you a feel for the vast scope of the applic .
of these limit theorem involv the poisson in a complet unexpect direct .
the central limit theorem gave us guarante for typic evid central .
the poisson distribut tell us thing about rare event .
we should finish up our stori with just on big slogan to complet all of thi and here it is .
rare event follow a poisson law .
all good thing must come to an end , and so to thi cours .
we've cover a lot of ground in eight week .
i hope i've been abl to commun to you a theori which is rich , which is luxuri , which is sumptuou .
it's built upon veri simpl basic principl .
but these principl inform applic which ar exot , which ar beauti , which ar potenti , which ar rare .
and if i have given you that much , i have given you someth valuabl , but i shouldn't let you run awai , simpli with a sai , well here is a formid mathemat apparatu and some of it wa veri tediou and difficult .
yeah , the applic ar neat , but boi i am studi how to appli these wa not easi at all .
it's begin to feel like drudgeri when i put it in those term .
now , the discoveri of beauti idea like thi is , at it's heart , a veri human endeavor , and thi endeavor carri a great deal of satisfact insid it .
at it's heart , thi endeavor is actual fun .
and so if you will indulg me in a last conclud adieu good bye , to you from me and all our chef who contribut to thi enterpris .
i'll begin with a word from jame clark maxwel .
exult the valu of frivol of fun in discoveri .
wow .
the eight week have flown by .
and in thi time , i've tri to give you , a sens of the , wonder that infus the subject .
from the mathemat foundat , to the gloriou vista of applic .
but it is certain true that at the end of a long sequenc , a compress sequenc like thi .
that you start feel a sens of ennui , a sens of weari when the equat appear more and more drab and duller .
it is easi to lose that sens of childlik wonder that john keat spoke about when he first encount chapman's homer .
then felt i , like some watcher of the ski when a new planet swim into hi ken .
is there code for wonder and joi in scienc , in mathemat , in technolog ?
assuredli , there is and i am go to leav you with a whimsic word on the import of joyou discoveri , of exhilar search , of fun in the enterpris , and thi is from jame clerk maxwel .
perhap the greatest scientist in the link between newton and einstein .
but maxwel wa more than just a scientist .
he had an impish sens of fun and thi permeat all hi write and in mani wai make hi discoveri even feel more magic .
so i need to set the stage for you for thi poem .
thi is in the best tradit of victorian parodi , of victorian light vers .
the set wa immedi after the napoleon war had ravag europ .
the time wa between <num> and <num> , in the middl of the 19th centuri , and the set wa the lai of a tran atlant cabl connect europ to the america .
thi project wa prodigi in it's difficulti .
<num> , <num> mile of cabl had to be laid .
enorm technolog problem had to be solv .
and on of the chief architect of thi project wa william thompson , who later becam lord kelvin .
i'm not go to take thi tempt alleywai to tell you about thi project .
it's a beauti stori in it's own right , but on of the myriad of technic problem that had to be solv wa the follow veri simpl observ .
if you send an electr signal <num> , <num> mile underwat , through a cabl , then by the time it reach it's destin , it is go to be sever attenu .
how doe on detect a signal which is so attenu ?
the current detector that were avail at that time , call deschanel galvanomet , were quit unequip for thi task .
and thompson turn hi redoubt mind to it and he invent a new current detector , a galvanomet .
in which he replac a needl by a beam of light .
and he show it to maxwel .
and maxwel wa enraptur .
and he felt move to write a poem of the glori of thi discoveri .
thi is on of two poem he wrote call lectur to women in the physic scienc .
you must rememb the time wa late 19th centuri .
and thi on is an od to a galvanomet .
and i'm go to recit thi for you to commun the joi and discoveri , the fun that maxwel felt in scientif discoveri .
so , thi is the part thompson's mirror galvanomet .
the set is a dark room , a small room , an alcov perhap with blacken curtain .
a littl beam of light is plai in .
and he ha an audienc of on .
and so , here we go .
od to a galvanomet .
the lamplight fall on blacken wall , and stream through narrow perfor .
the long beam plai o'er pasteboard scale with slow decai oscil .
flow , current , flow , set the quick light spot fly .
flow current , answer light spot .
flash , quiver , dy .
oh look , how queer , how thin and clear , and thinner , clearer , sharper grow .
the guid fire with central wire .
the fine degre distinctli show it .
swing magnet , swing .
advanc and reced .
swing magnet .
answer dearest , what is the final read ?
oh love , you fail to read the scale .
correct to tens of a divis , to mirror heaven , those ey were given , and not for method of precis .
break contact , break , set the free light spot fly .
break contact , rest the magnet , swing , creep , dy .
i'd like to leav you with maxwel's exhort on find scienc in discoveri .
i wish you joyou discoveri , exhilar search as you sift through zephyr of possibl .
at the end i have been a figur head for thi class .
the work which ha brought thi entir splendid set of video lectur to you ha been done by the chef that have been labor mightili in the background .
i invit you to listen to them bid you adieu , and joyou discoveri .
thank you , professor .
we hope you enjoi dine with us , and come again soon .
here's the rest of the crew .
thank you for all the effort that you put in thi cours , and pleas .
hi gui .
you made it thi far .
as franklin roosevelt onc said , you've dare greatli , you've been bloodi , you've been in the arena , and you came out stronger .
congratul .
see you next time .
hello gui .
i'm almost sure that you have enjoi thi cours with the legendari professor .
stai tune for futur cours .
bye .
our first applic deal with the art of make monei .
how doe on make monei ?
well , a faceti answer might be , well print it .
of cours , there ar a coupl of object to that score , that tend to earn us a long stretch under the hospit of the govern .
as long as i'm be faceti , what is the differ between the govern print monei and an individu print monei ?
in the former case , it's call econom .
in the latter case it's call fraud , but we ar be faceti .
of cours the set here is , how should on invest in a stock market ?
what govern the growth or wealth in a stock market ?
of cours the underli set is much too complex to be abl to do it full justic in on short introduct .
but , what we can hope to do is perhap glean some underli fundament about the movement of thi appar chaotic phenomenon of the stock in the stock market .
and so the question then is , how doe on categor a stock market ?
and how doe on character portfolio which govern invest in the stock market ?
let us begin by consid the movement and the price of a stock over a given dai .
on the dai i record thi lectur i look at the movement in price of the stock of appl incorpor .
now , at the end of the dai of trade , on stock in appl wa worth <num> . <num> .
of cours the movement of the stock price is chaotic , random , appar unpredict over the cours of the dai .
the natur point of refer for us then is , how much the stock is appreci by the end of the dai from where it wa the previou dai , or how much it ha lost ground ?
and so the natur point of refer is , what wa the close price of the stock in appl at the close of the previou dai's trade ?
and if you'll look at the right of your figur , you'll find in fine print that at the previou close , the stock price for appl wa <num> . <num> .
in other word , there's been a slight appreci .
the percentag of depreci is captur in thi idea of the price rel of the stock .
the rel price at the close of todai to the close of the previou dai's trade .
so , let's give it a name .
let's call thi the price of the stock rel .
let's call thi x and is defin to be the price at close todai , divid by the price at close of trade of the previou dai .
for the given number , x turn out to be <num> . <num> divid by <num> . <num> , or just a smidgen more than <num> , <num> . <num> .
that wa about a on half percent increas , an uptick in the price of the stock , and thi is fairli typic .
in routin dai , stock price move up or move down gradual , and so we end up have price rel which hover around on .
of cours if on ha a calam , a veri sharp bear market , and the stop , stock price drop dramat , then of cours , we'll have a number much less than on .
if , on the other hand , we have some irrat exuber , in the word of the former feder reserv chairman alan greenspan , if an irrat exuber and unbridl optim , and mayb on a given dai , a stock price mai jump up substanti .
but typic we expect the stock price rel , x , to be somewher near on , mayb just a bit below on if you have lost a littl bit of ground , mayb just a littl bit abov on if you've gain some ground .
all right , now let us see what might happen if we invest on thi dai on appl comput .
all right , so we're go to look at an invest , at the close of trade on the previou dai , we purchas a stock , or more than a stock .
and then we examin what it is worth , at the end of todai's trade .
suppos we had invest <num> , on euro , on rupe in appl , at the close of trade of the previou dai .
how much is it worth ?
well natur it is worth exactli the price rel .
so <num> at the , at the end of the previou dai's trade is now worth x at the end of todai's trade .
of cours we could invest more than <num> or less than <num> in principl .
suppos we invest a fraction a , a's some real number .
if we invest a , how much do we get ?
well , it will now be worth a time x .
each dollar give you x , therefor a give you a time x .
excel .
we now have an understand of what an invest will bring us for thi stock on thi dai .
but of cours , we know that it's danger to invest all our egg in on basket , howev pretti the basket .
thi leav us complet expos to the vagari of stock movement .
and so , a natur wai of hedg against the risk of movement of these individu stock is to diversifi , to invest in a portfolio of stock .
look , for thi now , we need to consid , not on stock , not on compani , but an ensembl of stock .
so , let's take a look at a stock market and again , we ar go to look at on dai of trade .
now , what is a stock market character by ?
well it's go to be character by possibl sever compani and sever publicli trade stock .
how mani ?
well let us sai there ar n stock that ar be trade , and the individu stock mai go up , thei mai go down .
each of the individu stock then is character by a stock price rel for that stock .
so let's sai there ar stock on , two , three up til m , and let's sai that for the jth stock , over the cours of that dai , the price rel for that stock is , in a natur notat , x subscript j , or simpli , xj .
so x1 repres the price rel for stock on , x2 for stock two , xm for stock m .
bear in mind , we typic anticip that these number x1 through xm ar bobbl around on , though of cours thei could be turbul .
thei could either be veri much larger than on , or perhap much smaller than on if you have either a , a bull market or a bear market .
but thi is what we typic expect , these x's , ar so mani of them .
let's character thi vector of possibl , these m possibl by give it a name .
let's call it bold face x and now the stock market is character by thi bold face x of stock price rel .
now , thi is tell us what ha happen from the close of trade yesterdai to the close of trade todai for each of the individu stock .
what is the appreci or the loss , in posit , for each of those stock ?
we now have an invest question .
let's sai we have a dollar to invest .
we could invest it all in a given stock , perhap appl , or we could split up the dollar and invest it across multipl stock .
thi is what is call a portfolio .
so what is a portfolio ?
it is an alloc of our wealth across the differ stock .
so let us sai again , we focu on a gener stock j .
and let's sai , at the close of trade on the previou dai , i invest a portion a sub j of my wealth , in that stock .
now , that mean i invest a sub <num> in stock on , a sub <num> in stock two , a sub m in stock m .
and these repres the fraction of a wealth that have distribut across these stock .
of cours sinc the a sub j's repres fraction , thei ar number between zero and on .
thei could be zero .
if an aj is zero , that just mean you've invest noth in stock j .
and , if a particular aj is on , that mean you put all your egg in on basket .
you invest all your monei in that on stock .
but more gener , you want to spread your wealth around , across multipl stock .
and thi is the essenc of a diversifi portfolio .
you hedg your risk by spread the risk across mani entiti .
again these number , a sub j have to be non neg , and becaus you're divid your total wealth across these entiti , these number have to add to on .
so your portfolio then is a vector of these possibl .
let's call that bold face littl a .
so now we have an idea of our portfolio .
let us fix a particular design of alloc of resourc across these stock .
let's fix a particular fort , portfolio .
thi is our invest at the end of the previou dai's trade .
have invest in thi fashion , have spread your wealth in thi fashion , what is your wealth worth todai at the end of trade ?
so , let's take stock .
so , we're start with an invest at the previou close , and now we ar ask , what is the valu of the invest now , at the end of todai's close ?
let's start by sai what if we invest <num> ?
now the <num> is split into these piec .
a portion a<num> of the <num> goe to stock on .
a portion a2 goe to stock two .
a portion am goe to stock m .
an a1 invest in stock on , which ha a price rel x1 , will earn you a1 time x1 at the end of todai from stock on .
likewis , an a2 invest in stock two , which ha a price rel of x2 , well i've earn you a2 time x2 for stock two , and so on and so forth .
and a sub m invest in stock m at the end of todai's trade will have earn you am time xm .
and natur your net wealth now is go to be the sum of a1x1 , a2x2 , through amxm .
let's give thi a name .
let's call thi sum , s for sum of cours , but of cours the sum depend upon the particular stock price rel , bold face x .
depend on how the stock move , the sum is go to move around , for a fix portfolio a , right ?
so let's give it a name .
let's call it s , and of cours , s depend implicitli on the particular stock price rel for that dai .
what if we had a wealth w to invest at the end of the previou dai's trade ?
well , then each dollar in w will earn s x and therefor w dollar will have earn you todai w time s x .
so , s of x is now a critic element to look at .
what doe it come out ?
it is the amount wealth ha grown if <num> were invest over the cours of a dai , where a vector of stock price rel x result .
in other word , s of x tell you the ratio of your wealth at the end of todai , to the wealth at the end of yesterdai .
we'll call thi simpli then , the wealth rel , the wealth at the end of todai , rel to the wealth at the end of yesterdai .
so , the game here now is clearli go to be devolv upon the natur of these wealth rel .
bear in mind that underli these experi is go to be a chanc phenomenon , a veri complic chanc phenomenon .
so , in gener , the x's ar go to be chanc driven and we ar not go to be apriori or abl to be abl to predict what an x is .
if on could of cours , we could make a lot of monei veri quickli .
so the wealth rel , s of x , ar themselv chanc driven , and dictat ultim by the choic of portfolio .
so thi is what is go to be come up next .
let us now look at what happen when we look at not on dai of trade , but a success of dai of trade .
we turn our attent over a period of time of trade to a set where we have an underli portfolio .
a distribut of wealth across stock and we ar go to keep that portfolio intact .
in other word , at all moment of time we want the distribut wealth in the stock to be govern in these proport , a1 , a2 through a sub m .
thi is sometim call a constantli rebalanc portfolio becaus when you initi start your wealth and you spread it out across the stock .
at the end of a dai trade the stock ar worth differ amount and so we have differ amount invest in differ stock .
what we then do promptli at the end of the next dai trade is to move resourc around .
so that again all the stock have got resourc alloc in the proport a1 through am .
on at the end of the dai and we do the same thing again rebal the portfolio .
so that the end of the dai the distribut of stock the alloc of stock stai in the same proport as given by the portfolio choic a .
okai , so thi is the set of a constantli rebalanc portfolio .
we ar imagin of cours , thi is not practic but we ar imagin that we ar do thi daili .
now with thi in mind , how doe wealth grow ?
the growth of wealth is govern by a success of dai govern by stock price rel .
where a vector of stock price rel give us ratio for individu stock of close price on a given dai to the close price on the previou dai .
for a given stock price rel vector will face x , the wealth ratio , the amount over that dai , that wealth is increas is given by s x a1x1 plu a2x2 through amxm .
now let's see what happen when we have a success of dai of invest .
so we could look at a dai by number for each dai we're go to look at the vector of stock price rel x for that dai .
we're go to look at , how much wealth grow , the daili wealth rel .
that is , the wealth at the end of the dai , to the wealth at the end of the previou dai , s of x .
and then we ar actual go to look at , how the wealth is grow overal , over a success of dai .
so , let's start by set the stage as sai dai number zero , number arbitrarili and let's sai we start with an initi wealth of <num> .
w sub <num> the wealth at the start of dai on w0 is <num> , now what happen on dai on ?
at the end of the first dai's trade each stock move up or down and is govern by a stock rel for that stock .
the vector of stock rel for dai <num> is a vector x but now the notat is go to get a littl more complex but not too grievou i hope , right ?
we're go to have to track which vector of stock rel for which dai .
let's us a superscript <num> to remind ourselv that thi is a vector of stock price rel for dai on .
the is the vector of stock price ratio at the end of dai <num> to the end of dai <num> .
for that vector of stock price rel , the wealth rel at the end of dai <num> is s of x<num> .
now what is s of x1 ?
it is a weight sum of a's time x's but the x's now ar for the particular vector of stock price rel for dai <num> .
let's give it a short name , right ?
the equat's get to be a mouth , let's just call it s1 .
so , s1 is the daili wealth rel at the end of dai <num> , it is the proport wealth ha increas over the cours of the first dai .
and so what is your net wealth ?
well , your net wealth will be , let's call it w with a subscript <num> to tell ourselv we're deal with the end of dai <num> .
w1 sai , start with the initi wealth w0 and multipli it by your daili wealth rel for dai <num> as <num> .
of cours w0 is <num> so w<num> is just s<num> in thi case but let's build on <num> more dai .
now we have a new wealth , <num> ha becom someth els it's now w<num> .
that is go to get reinvest in the stock market and what we ar go to do is rebal the portfolio .
becaus individu stock have gone up and down the percentag in each stock ar now not in the ratio of the origin portfolio .
rebal it by move stock around , move price around , move alloc around until we have the end of dai <num> .
all stock ar now in the proport a1 through am we've rebalanc our portfolio .
and now we start dai <num> .
now let's see what happen , dai <num> is go by and now that our set of chanc or occurr .
it give rise to a vector of stock rel call x with a superscript <num> now to tell ourselv we ar deal with stock price rel for dai <num> .
the wealth rel over the cours of the dai , how much proportion ?
ha wealth increas or decreas over that dai is of cours s of x2 .
it's a weight sum of the stock price rel for dai <num> .
give it a shot and call back name , call it s2 .
thi is the proport that wealth ha increas over dai <num> .
how much in total ?
well , at the end of dai <num> , i have w1 and so you're net wealth at the end of dai <num> is w1 time s<num> , the wealth rel for dai <num> .
of cours , now we can imagin how we ar go to do thi .
dai <num> begin with an initi wealth distribut accord to my portfolio , a1 through am .
the initi wealth now for dai <num> is w2 .
dai <num> is go to see a stock rel x<num> that give rise to a wealth rel , s of x3 which i'll call s3 .
and s3 will multipli my initi wealth w2 to get my new wealth .
of cours , we're go to build on thi dai by dai by dai and eventu let's sai we look at dai number n .
in dai n , the vector of stock rel for the individu stock is now some other chanc of an entiti x with the super script m catch the dai .
the work rel over the cours of that dai , the proport wealth ha increas over the cours of dai n , sn is s of xm .
and what is a net wealth , well at the end of dai n you have wn .
and wn look at what ar the start point wn minu <num> at the end of the previou dai .
multipl it by the wealth rel sn and there you have it wn then is wn minu <num> time sn .
thi give us a veri clean and simpl wai of express how wealth is grow .
and of cours we'd like to come to some determinist conclus about on what is happen .
thi is what we will turn to next .
we ar now interest in try to analyz what on can sai about the growth or the diminut of wealth over a success of invest accord to a given portfolio .
so bear in mind , the portfolio at hand is a vector of possibl , a distribut of wealth across variou stock .
we're deal with a constantli rebalanc portfolio , where at the end of each dai's trade we reappropri wealth so that the proport the variou stock fit the prescript of the portfolio .
the progress of wealth is govern by the stock price rel for each trade dai .
so for dai n , we have a stock price rel vector x with a superscript n .
which tell you how much stock , individu stock , have gone up or down in each of those stock .
the wealth rel at the close of a given dai , sai , n , tell us how much on dollar invest at the end of the previou dai's trade will have made at the end of the current dai's trade .
and final , the growth of wealth , start with an initi wealth w0 , which we shall take to be <num> , is govern by a simpl recurs equat .
wn , the wealth at the end of dai end's trade , is given by the wealth at the end of the previou dai's trade , wn minu <num> , time the wealth rel for dai n .
now , we realli can't ask for a much simpler character of what's happen to the invest .
but of cours , we realiz that the wealth rel , s1 , s2 , s3 , through sn , ar all chanc driven .
and so , of cours , thi is now a chanc driven entiti .
can you sai anyth reason about it ?
so , we begin the analysi by set up a simpl induct step , and we try to work it through step by step .
we know what the wealth is at the close of trade on dai n in term of the wealth at the close of trade on dai n minu <num> .
what can we sai about the wealth at the close of trade dai n minu <num> ?
well , of cours , the same recurs equat tell us , it is relat to the wealth at the close of trade on dai n minu <num> , modul by the wealth rel for dai n minu <num> .
or in other word , we can decompos wn minu <num> into wn minu <num> time sn minu <num> .
and now , we've got a slightli longer equat .
but , the wealth at the close of trade on dai n minu <num> can be relat to the wealth at the close of trade on dai n minu <num> by look on more dai in the past .
and now , our equat expand a littl further .
and now , the pattern becom clear .
we're go to induct step through on dai at a time , go back into the past , until we end up with dai <num> .
and each dai we go back , we incorpor on more wealth rel for that dai into a product .
and so , at the end , we relat the wealth at the end of dai n to the start wealth , w0 , by a simpl product .
the wealth at dai n is go by the initi wealth time the individu wealth rel for each dai .
for simplic , let's assum we have an initi wealth w0 of <num> .
right , if we had some other wealth , it's just go to multipli everyth by whatev the initi wealth wa .
so , if our initi invest wa <num> unit , distribut accord to a portfolio a , then after n dai of trade , our wealth will have becom the product of the wealth rel s1 , s2 , s3 , through sn .
on could hardli ask for a simpler express on the right hand side .
or could on ?
if on were to quibbl at all , it is becaus the express on the right is a product .
it's a product of chanc driven entiti .
and product ar nice and eleg and fairli simpl to describ , but we might worri that handl a product is a lot harder than handl a sum .
wouldn't it be nice if instead of a product on the right , we actual had a sum ?
how can on convert a product into a sum ?
we scratch our head and we sai , well , an atavist tug at a memori , from our first dai of calculu , tell us , wait a minut , the logarithm function ha exactli the desir properti .
the logarithm of a product is a sum of logarithm .
and so , if i were to take a logarithm of the right hand side , i would get a sum .
that leav us on more question .
the logarithm could be to ani base whatsoev .
what is a reason base ?
we shall choos <num> as the base of the logarithm , becaus as we shall see shortli , it's go to give us a veri clean and intuit descript of what is happen to wealth .
so accordingli , let us take the logarithm base <num> of the product on the right .
but of cours , we can't simpli cavalierli take a logarithm of someth on the right and preserv equal .
to undo the logarithm , we're to put the logarithm in the expon of a power of <num> .
and now we see , all we've done is rewritten a product as <num> to the power of log base <num> of the product .
but now , the magic of the logarithm sai , the logarithm of a product is a sum of logarithm .
and therefor , without further ado , in the expon , i will get <num> to a power of a sum of logarithm .
each of the logarithm is a logarithm base <num> of , bear in mind , of these wealth ratio .
so , we have the logarithm base <num> of s1 , the wealth ratio , the amount wealth ha increas proportion over the cours of dai <num> .
the proport increas of wealth over dai <num> is s<num> , and we have logarithm base <num> of s<num> , and so on down .
so now we've got a sum of logarithm , and thi is promis becaus we know how to deal with sum .
on more step of simplif , or at least clarif .
we have a sum of n entiti , admittedli look complex and messi .
well , it would be natur then to consid what happen to the averag , the arithmet averag , of such a sum .
in other word , what happen if we divid by n ?
that give us the averag chang , the averag logarithm , of a wealth ratio .
of cours , i can't simpli divid by n if i don't multipli by n .
and so , here is an ident .
the wealth at the end of dai n's trade is given by a power of <num> .
and in the expon , i get n time an arithmet averag .
let's promptli give it a name .
let's call that arithmet averag delta sub n .
all right , and now we've got a clean , eleg descript of what is happen to wealth .
the wealth after n dai of trade , start from a unit wealth , apport daili in a constantli rebalanc portfolio , a , is <num> to the power n time delta of n .
and what is delta of n ?
it's an arithmet averag of the logarithm of wealth ratio .
thi is a beauti , clean , and eleg descript , and now we ar essenti home free .
thi will be our next subject .
we now have a beguilingli simpl descript of the growth wealth after n dai of trade .
the descript is in term of an expon , delta n which look complex but is an arithmet averag .
it look like a sampl mean .
you rememb the duck which ha frequent cross our path .
all right .
if it walk like a duck , if it quack like a duck , it look like a duck .
if it walk like a sampl mean , if it quack like a sampl mean , it look like a sampl mean .
the moment we have someth like an arithmet averag , a sampl mean , we immedi think about concentr .
we have a law of larg number .
but of cours , for thi to work , we've go to now have to flesh out an underli chanc law .
so , let's put in place a sanit structur for an ideal stock market .
let us suppos we have a stochast stationari market , in other word the stock price rel dai to dai ar govern independ by an underli chanc law .
in other word , the individu stock price rel x1 , x2 , x3 , for dai on , dai two , dai three , and so forth ar independ of each other .
thei connot independ trial from a common underli distribut .
let's sai the poster child for that is a stock price rel x drawn accord to a law .
bear in mind , i am not sai that on a given dai's trade , the movement of a stock cannot effect anoth stock .
ye , inde it can .
for exampl , on a given dai if the tech sector is do well , then your anticip technolog stock pull each other up .
wherea if let's sai the medic sector , the pharmaceut sector is do poorli , you might anticip that pharmaceut stock pull each other down .
thei could well be depend in the movement between stock .
what we ar sai though is that on a dai to dai basi , the entir ensembl of movement combin repeat independ trial .
within the dai the stock market movement could well be depend in veri complic wai .
of cours that'll have to be captur by an underli probabl law or a distribut , which now realli is a distribut in an m dimension space .
so , potenti veri complex .
thi is a highli sanit view of the stock market becaus , of cours to sai that the distribut of the chanc law govern the stock price rel , is independ from dai to dai , seem to be overtli simplist .
so , but bear with me .
we have to start somewher after all , and thi is the simplest set we could look at .
so thi is what we call a stochast stationari market .
in other word , the stock price rel dai to dai ar independ trial .
now the moment of independ trial , the wealth rel for the given choic of portfolio a ar now prescrib the moment you tell me what these stock rel x's ar .
so the wealth rel forward after dai on is s of x1 what we call s1 .
the wealth rel after dai two , is xs of x2 what we call s2 , so on .
but x1 , x2 , x3 , and so forth ar independ trial and therefor their wealth rel that ar engend by these trial .
s1 , s2 , s3 , through sn , ar also independ trial with some complex underli distribut .
but if the wealth rel s1 , s2 , s3 from dai to dai ar constitut independ trial , then the logarithm of them ar also independ trial .
and therefor yeah , is a fundament realiz .
the algorithm of the wealth ratio , dai to dai , constitut a sequenc of repeat independ trial with an underli common distribut .
potenti veri complex , potenti engend ultim by the probabl law which govern the stock price rel dai to dai .
but , in principl you've got a sequenc of independ trial with some complic underli distribut .
an actual question then to ask is , what is it expect ?
so , let's take a typic such trial , govern by that distribut , and look at the expect of the logarithm of the wealth rel for a given dai .
the expect of a logarithm of s , for a gener x , the expect of the logarithm of s of x .
let's paus and take a good , long look at thi .
we have now reduc the problem to a sequenc of repeat independ trial .
these trial can note that a logarithm of the wealth ratio dai by dai .
the expect of thi , now depend onli on two thing .
on , what were the underli chanc law , for thi stock price rel exist ?
that's potenti veri complex , but it's effect distribut in thi model .
and that distribut is not vari from dai to dai .
and second , it depend onli on the particular portfolio of wealth distribut that we ar us .
the constantli rebalanc portfolio a .
so if you assum that the underli chanc law for the stock price rel as someth fix but unknown , at the end of the dai the expect of the logarithm of the wealth rel is determin sole by the choic of portfolio .
let's call it delta of a .
and , here's now our realiz .
we've got a sequenc of repeat independ trial with expect , delta , depend onli on the choic of a .
what is delta sub n ?
it is a sampl mean of these trial .
it is the arithmet averag of the logarithm of the wealth ratio .
and in on fell swoop the law of larg number tell us that delta of n is concentr asymptot for larg enough valu of n .
at it expect valu , delta determin sole by the fix choic of portfolio a .
in other word , delta sub a behav for all intent and purpos , as if it were a constant .
thi is a magic of the law of larg number .
a veri chanc driven entiti , opt by a myriad of chanc fluctuat , when suitabl averag , behav in essenc like a constant .
of cours , we could dress up thi raw statement , by put in place error toler and confid , and then we have a formal statement of the law of larg number .
but onc we've understood what the law of larg number is sai , then we could captur all of thi by simpli sai delta of n behav like a constant .
it behav like delta of a , a fix number determin sole by a .
and let's captur all of thi verbiag in short by simpli introduc some new notat .
let us simpli write delta sub n is equal to with a littl dot on top of the equal sign , a constant .
of cours delta of n is not actual equal to a constant .
delta n on on hand is a chanc variabl .
the constant is determin sole by the portfolio a .
but the law of larg number tell us that with veri high probabl , delta of n is go to be veri close to delta of a .
delta of n behav like a constant .
and with thi in hand , our growth of wealth take on an even simpler mean , an even simpler cost .
after n dai of trade , with a constantli rebalanc portfolio , assum that we have a stochast stationari market of repeat independ trial for the stock price rel , wealth grow essenti as if it were constant .
it'll behav es , essenti like <num> to the power n time a constant delta over a .
and now we can interpret what that constant is .
<num> over delta over a , repres the number of dai need for you to doubl your wealth , of cours thi is if delta of a is posit .
of cours there's a possibl that delta of a is neg becaus you see in there that a logarithm could be neg or posit .
so an expect valu could give rise to a neg number .
what doe a neg valu for delta of a portend ?
it mean that wealth is decreas exponenti .
and then delta of a is then , repres the halv ratio .
we'll simpli give it all on name .
we'll sai that delta of a is the doubl rate for portfolio a .
bear in mind ff delta a is posit , thi tell you the rate at which wealth doubl .
if delta of a is neg it tell you the rate at which wealth halv .
of cours we ar hope that we're deal with a market which is a bull market .
the delta of a is posit even by a slight amount .
what thi tell us is thi .
if the doubl rate for portfolio a , delta of a , is posit even by a smidgen then wealth will grow exponenti at that rate .
but if it is sadli neg even by a small amount , then wealth will decreas exponenti at that rate .
natur enough , we're in thi busi to try to make monei , not lose it .
and so , we would like to ensur that the doubl rate is posit .
how do we do that ?
well , we have room to plai .
we can fiddl with the portfolio .
and so we want to consid the class of portfolio for which the doubl rate is posit .
and if we can find ani such portfolio , then we will veri rapidli accumul wealth at an exponenti rate in thi highli sanit model .
but of cours , we ar greedi .
we not onli to accumul wealth , we want to accumul wealth fast .
so thi lead to a question of how should on select the best portfolio ?
what is an optim portfolio ?
and our interpret now of delta of n ha essenti been given by a constant doubl rate .
make clear what we have to do .
we have to make the expon as big as possibl .
and so , here is a slogan .
we should select that portfolio , call it a star , which maxim the doubl rate delta of a .
the moment you chose such a portfolio , then that portfolio will engend a doubl rate , call it delta star .
thi is delta of the optim portfolio , a star .
thi is the maximum of the doubl rate over all possibl portfolio .
thi is the optim doubl rate of wealth .
and so delta star tell us , for a given underli chanc law govern stock price rel , what the best alloc of resourc is and how fast wealth will grow if on alloc it in accord with those principl .
but of cours , you should bear in mind that thi is a highli sanit view of realiti .
the real stock market , sadli , doe not conform to all our simpl assumpt .
so we should end with a disclaim .
what we have discuss so far , is a principl wai of think about invest .
in a stock market of possibl .
how to go about creat an optim distribut of wealth , an alloc of wealth , across differ stock .
in other word , an optim portfolio .
but of cours , you realiz that we have creat a highli sanit , a highli simplifi view of how real stock market actual function .
and so it would be appropri to provid some disclaim as to the worth and the valu of all the calcul we have done .
now to begin , to optim a portfolio , rememb we want to maxim a doubl rate of wealth .
and so we maxim it , by maxim doubl rate over all choic of portfolio .
to find , to extract the best portfolio , the optim portfolio .
in gener , thi is a highli non linear problem .
it's an optim problem , which involv a search in a potenti high dimension space , with a lot of constraint .
right , these portfolio vector have to have non neg element and thei have to add to on .
the function of optim is highli non linear .
thi is not easi .
it is clear that it is go to be computation expens .
for those of you who go on to take a cours in mathemat optim , you will recogn that the theori which govern thi is call kuhn tucker theori .
and you'll find out that the optim portfolio will have to satisfi certain condit call kuhn tucker condit .
but , the take awai messag is what ever we do thi is go to be difficult and expens .
so if we want the veri best possibl , it's go to cost us time and effort .
but there's much wors , in term stumbl block for us .
to optim the delta of a as the doubl rate over portfolio a .
rememb thi repres an expect , delta of a .
the doubl rate for a portfolio a , wa the expect valu of the logarithm of the wealth ratio correspond to some unknown distribut for the stock .
in gener , we don't know thi distribut .
if we knew the chanc law that govern life , our life would be a lot easier , wouldn't it ?
in gener , we don't know .
nobodi know , what ar the exact chanc law which govern stock movement .
we don't even know these approxim perhap .
and if we don't know the underli chanc law , the underli distribut , then we have no hope of write out an explicit comput for an expect accord to that chanc law .
thi suggest then , that perhap we have to find wai to infer , learn , approxim underli chanc law .
older dai , we had the realm of heurist .
but , even if we thought we knew the chanc law , there's a further object .
and that is that the assumpt that the market is stationari , stochast speak .
in other word , you've got a chanc law , which doe not chang from dai to dai .
thi is highli unrealist .
of cours , stock movement in a given dai , inform what's go to happen the next dai .
if you're in a bear market , then stock price ar gener drop befor thei bottom out and start rise .
if you're in a bull market , stock price ar gener rise .
it is too simplist to assum that the law ar , a stationari in time .
thei don't chang in time .
and two , that the law result in independ trial .
each dai potenti effect the next dai .
of cours thi lead to veri complic chanc descript of an underli chanc process .
is there a wai forward ?
if there's a wai forward , then it's got to take into account a realiti where stock price rel distribut chang with time .
and there could be depend across the dai .
not just across stock , but across individu dai of trade .
now it turn out that the theori we have develop , can be extend , expand , into a domain which deal with a construct of what ar call univers portfolio .
which will work for ani collect of chanc law , as long as there's some kind of , asymptot stabil for the law .
you understand , when the law ar allow to vari wildli from dai to dai , then there's no hope .
so , we need to have some kind of symmetri pull thing in .
these ar call stationari , or cordic law .
but that take us veri far afield , and of cours we understand that the technic now ar go to be signific .
right ?
but now there is a theori of univers portfolio , which handl a larg basket of possibl .
but thi still requir expens individu optim .
and now on more .
and thi is the most signific stumbl block to what i've told you .
we could , in some sens , handl chang distribut , differ distribut .
but what i've ignor in all of thi is that ultim invest advis , stock broker need to make a live .
thei charg you to invest in the stock market .
and typic , everi time you chang an alloc of stock , you pai transact fee .
now it mai be okai to pai a transact fee onc at the start of the game .
it mai be okai to pai a transact fee onc in a long while .
but our procedur here requir constant re balanc .
at the end of each dai , you go ahead and look at what is the worth of your portfolio spread across the stock .
re balanc it so that the stock portfolio aggreg ar in the proport accord to your choic of portfolio , and we ar to do thi on a daili basi .
everi dai is go incur transact cost , and these transact cost will sink ani possibl gain you might make .
okai , so there ar all these disclaim to a gener theori , a warn that the theori , in isol , can't just be us naiv .
you can't just go in , plug it in and sai there's deu ex machina and plug it in , turn the crank and out come wealth .
no , life is much more complex than that , right ?
but what have we learn ?
now , it might be appropri to conclud thi particular discuss with yet anoth slogan .
and what is our slogan ?
the law of larg number give us a principl wai to think about stock peregrin , stock movement .
give us a principl wai to think about alloc of wealth across variou stock .
and it give us certain guidepost , certain thing which ar potenti feasibl , in term of the growth of wealth , of cours in an ideal world .
in practic , we move awai from the ideal and sai , given that we have a messi real world , what can these princip teach us about actual invest ?
and again , the law of larg number tell us here ar some principl wai to think about it .
here ar some principl heurist that we can extract from the ruin .
of cours , heurist don't have a priori guarante .
but in ani case , a cours of action base upon principl heurist is much to be prefer over a cours of action base upon just random gut feel .
where there's no thought or cogit behind what we ar do , what we ar try to optim .
of cours , we could get more inform about the process and about our analysi .
if we wish , we could beyond concentr , as i told you , the , the law of larg number is a crude scaffold .
it tell us roughli where thing ar go view with a heavi , veri heavi normal , with a veri heavi thumb push down the scale .
but we can get much finer inform if you look closer to the limit point , us the central limit theorem .
but we we won't take the time to do that here .
i shall illustr for you , a final view of , central tendenc through the ag of the bell curv , in an applic in a quit differ context , next .
the central limit theorem take pride of place of the crown jewel of the classic theori of probabl .
we have seen it's long and gloriou histori as it evolv from it's earli begin in <num> .
to the veri rich all encompass domain that it seem to encompass todai .
let me conclud our present of the central limit theorem with an applic in a set of some subtilti the issu of fraud .
and what i will talk about is fraud in academ circl or at least the accus of it .
what statist ha to sai about thi and where the central limit theorem come to plai ?
so thi is the curiou case of sir cyril burt , psychologist .
so let me start by tell you what the background is .
cyril burt wa on fo the preemin psychologist of the 20th centuri .
he wa a fellow of jesu colleg at oxford univers , a fellow at the royal academi .
he wa the first psychologist to be knight in <num> .
and he retir from hi professorship at the univers colleg london in <num> after a long and extraordinarili success career .
he continu to be veri prolif , publish wide after hi retir .
and from <num> onward until hi death in <num> , he publish a larg number of paper .
he wa well known for hi studi of ident twin , veri influenti studi .
but todai i shall look at a studi or phase on the herit of intellig .
he publish a paper on iq's and how intellig is pass on from parent to child in <num> , turn out to be a veri influenti paper .
thi wa a set when he di in <num> , <num> year after the public of the paper and everyth wa rosi for a few year until <num> .
leon kamin at princeton univers publish a book call , the scienc and polit of iq in which he cast doubt about the usabl of burt's data .
with a strong imput , that perhap there wa academ fraud in the present of the data .
thi wa of cours in the , in the word of tennyson in the ladi of charlott , a rift in the lute which grow still make the music mute .
cayman's accus against a personag of , of such renown caus immedi and strident protest .
colleagu , student , of burt's left to hi defens and accus and counter accus were trade freeli .
the stori ha leg and todai a veri larg number of point and counterpoint have been rais in the scientif press and in the popular press on thi issu .
what we shall do todai is take a look at what statist can sai about thi ?
and as we shall find that ye inde , a principl statist approach in the problem can shed some light on these .
but as alwai in the applic of form of model , mathemat model to a physic realiti .
we shall find that there ar limit to what a model can sai and there ar someth that statist and probabl cannot sai .
so thi is the background , so let us leap directli into the issu and thi is the case of iq data that is present by burt in hi <num> paper .
so thi tabl is taken directli from burt's paper and the listen should feel free to verifi that the number ar present and ar inde accur .
it is unfortun , all too easi to make mistak in thi kind of data entri and in the analysi of data like thi that said some caution is alwai advis .
thi wa on of two tabl that appear in burt's paper of <num> .
thi wa hi present of iq data , intellig quotient data for adult .
now , a student todai ha a shortli had of iq test and possibl ha taken that when thei were in elementari school perhap or perhap out of curios over the internet .
the test itself in it origin form wa develop in <num> by the german psychologist william stern .
todai , if on take a test out of curios over the internet , on could do a test in sai <num> or <num> minut , though such test ar consid unreli , thei're unproctor .
a proctor test might draw anywher from an hour and a half to two hour , right ?
so these test ar not simpl and easi to administ thei actual take some time to do it carefulli .
keep that in mind thi ha a bear upon how the stori unfold so here ar burt's data .
now , what did he present ?
well , what burt did in thi paper wa break up adult into six profession categori .
what he call categori on , a higher profession .
all the the wai down to categori six , unskil .
these iq test were administ to a popul categor by these occup characterist and then iq score were record and tabul .
so you notic that , you know , have a spread of iq score and if on believ that higher profession attain is somehow correl with intellig then perhap the tabl seem to reflect that kind of understand .
in ani case , these ar the number that were report .
paus and take a look at them , right ?
so the iq score , as is typic rang from somewher around <num> to <num> , all the wai up to past <num> .
score in the <num>'s and <num>'s ar consid defici .
score abov <num> ar consid a geniu level .
i'd sai i can see now spread of score for intellig .
paus the lectur and look at the tabl from a higher vantag point , right ?
let's not do an analysi yet but look at the number heurist , doe anyth leap out at you ?
doe anyth look a littl strang perhap ?
someth that need perhap explan , right ?
paus and take a look and come back when you ar readi .
oh , your back .
now , perhap on thing that might have struck you is that the number of peopl that were test wa exactli <num> , <num> .
where exactli <num> , <num> peopl test ?
if you've done ani kind of data collect , you realiz that it's sometim difficult to get such perfect whole number , right ?
we might anticip , we try test and we end up with <num> or perhap <num> , <num> .
but perhap that's okai , on could imagin that a , a success of test were done until exactli <num> thousand peopl were test and then it wa stop , perhap .
here's anoth number which look a littl surpris .
in the last column , in the aggreg of the total the mean iq there we take mean of the number in the tabl , a tabul and you find that the total is exactli <num> .
now thi seem certainli a littl more strang , on would perhap not anticip that if on collect data at random , at thousand piec of data .
that the averag would add up so beautifulli to a whole number , exactli <num> perhap that on actual doe need some explic .
now , here is on more featur to keep an ey on and i'll ask you to rememb thi .
in the higher profession class , class on , it look like there ar exactli three peopl who ar test , okai ?
wa it three exactli , the number of cours feel a littl low to be form statist conclus but perhap that is in fact reason .
for mani case , accord to the tabl three individu ar test in the higher profession categori .
now , thi is the first of two tabl that , that provid in thi paper .
and except for the format i've tri to keep the structur of the tabl to keep the integr of the structur intact .
now , burt wa interest in the herit of intellig .
is intellig actual pass on from parent to child ?
so , to accompani thi tabl of iq for adult he list now a tabl of iq's for their children and here it is .
and again , it's a tabl much like the previou on .
the children were tag with a profession class of the parent .
so again the children appear at the profession class on through six , from higher profession all the wai down to unskil and those classif refer to their father .
again , you notic a spread of valu and there seem to be a high correl again between children of more accomplish parent and potenti higher iq's .
and with children of perhap less accomplish parent seem to have more variabl and perhap smaller iq's .
again , on believ that intellig is a herit characterist and that higher profession class , higher attain in profession life .
suggest a higher attitud , a higher intellig then such data seem to be in support of these hypothes .
the game , the two factor that we look at earlier strike us .
we've got exactli <num> children repres in thi tabl .
the mean iq across these <num> is again <num> and in the higher profession categori , we have three children repres .
so there ar question to be answer about the data and it present .
to resolv them , we ar go to have to turn to burt's paper .
so let me begin by turn to burt's paper of <num> and provid a select commentari on what we might discov there , said to remind you to jog your memori .
these ar the two tabl on iq present by burt in hi paper for adult and for the children .
when on examin thi data , sever question come to mind .
on , when and where wa the studi perform ?
how were the test administ ?
what exactli <num> , <num> adult and <num> , <num> children test ?
wa more than on child test from a given famili ?
how did the mean iq for adult and for children ?
both turn out to be exactli <num> .
ar the number three individu in the upper profession class , higher profession class big enough to provid reliabl statist evid ?
the listen can add more question along these line .
now to answer these , we will have to turn to burt's paper .
but as cayman and other have point out , it is remark how littl burt actual sai in that paper .
so here ar some select quotat from burt's paper .
now let's natur bear in mind that quot taken out of context could be entir mislead .
and so to get an accur and complet perspect , she should turn to the origin paper .
but have said that , let me glean select quot , which i think .
establish a tenur and the characterist of the paper and the result .
so to begin here's on .
in the paper , we find the sentenc that the survei and the subsequ inquiri were carri over quit substanti period of about <num> year .
now you should paus and think about thi for a moment .
a studi , which ha gone for a veri prolong period time would impli that the result were put togeth from sever smaller studi carri out perhap under differ condit .
todai , a statistician would call thi a meta analysi .
but thi wa well befor meta analys were actual formal put out on the tabl and analyz and understood .
it is not that thei ar useless .
of cours , there is util in meta analys properli done at the hand of a train statistician .
but the moment we put togeth sever studi , mani of them small , on should anticip that variabl and uncertainti is go to increas and so it doe .
the , let's now might rememb the case of avandia from glaxosmithklin in the discuss on drug test .
doubt were cast on the safeti of avandia us a meta studi , a meta analysi and base on that analysi , the food and drug administr enjoin that a caution be place on the sale of avandia .
make explicit observ that a risk of cardiovascular advers event could be enhanc by take the drug .
a few year later , further studi , caus the food and drug administr to chang their mind and overturn the origin rule and sai that there wa actual no evid that avandia wa in fact as danger as origin thought .
the point here of cours is that , that studi like that these , which combin data ar import and can be us , but carri enhanc variabl and risk .
anoth quot from the paper sai or at least cast some light on how and where the test were perform .
so burt sai that the children for the bulk of the data were obtain from a particular counti , a burrow in london , which wa and the emphasi is mine , typic of the whole counti .
there ar no detail provid on what typic mean .
so the reader ha to form our own conclus base upon at ball center like thi .
about the likelihood that the data were in fact repres .
yet , anoth quotat from the paper .
the occup characterist were base not on prestig or incom , but on the degre of abil requir for the work .
again , notic that there's a signific subject element in the classif from on through six of the adult in the survei .
thi is not in itself bad or reprehens , but what is difficult is for the reader to form a firm assess of whether the subject of evalu were well found .
and yet anoth , the assess of adult intellig were less thorough and less reliabl .
why ?
becaus burt goe on to sai that some of the test were conduct by interview , other by actual test .
but there is no data provid on what fraction of the test were conduct verbal , what fraction were conduct by actual run of the test .
what wa in the test ?
which group were test verbal ?
all of thi is opaqu .
here's on more and thi shed some light on some of the number that we have seen .
burt goe on to sai that the frequenc insert , so thei call that in the upper profession class .
three individu were appar test adult and children .
he goe on to sai that the number were much more than three .
again , the emphasi ar mine .
he sai , the number three wa actual more near <num> and that all the number were skill were weight proportion to reflect the estim proport in the popul as a whole .
how will these estim come out , we do not know .
wa the wait done proportion , the same for all the categori .
presum , but burt doesn't alwai sai thi .
but if we were to make that refer , then if three were to be about on hundr twenti .
then perhap <num> , <num> , the number in the studi for each tabl wa perhap more like <num> , <num> .
three to on hundr twenti .
<num> , <num> to <num> , <num> .
but again , i caution you that doe not actual sai that <num> , <num> adult and <num> , <num> children were test .
but perhap , it could be suggest by the word in the sentenc .
goe on to explain that the number themselv were rescal and recent , so that the mean of the whole group wa exactli <num> and the standard deviat <num> or the varianc , the squar of the standard deviat <num> squar or <num> .
why would he do thi ?
it's not clear , but perhap on explan could be that , assess of iq have been tradition place on a scale with <num> at the midpoint with a certain variabl , where <num> or <num> wa consid veri defici and <num> wa consid highli profici .
and so , it is natur to try and center the data along those line .
the student who ha done ani kind of experiment is well awar of the vagari of experiment apparatu .
if on , for exampl , doe ultrasound imageri , then depend upon the equip us and the skill of the oper variou base line could move around and so for the radiologist to interpret what the imageri actual is .
she will have to recent , rescal it , so that all the imag appear on a standard scale .
so perhap , immortu along these line wa at work when burt rescal the data .
but again , he doe not sai thi .
now , at the end of thi , the reader might will go awai with the feel that , well , that wa certainli sloppi in the present of hi data .
and thi is a heret statement perhap .
perhap , not unusu so for those tablet of that time .
but to move from sloppi to an acquisit of fraud is a veri veri larg jump .
so thi is what we want to try to get a handl on .
let me try to summar some of the featur that i have illustr for you in through these comment and that's paper .
so let's look at what the origin sai or at least summar it and in parenthesi might take on what it doe not sai .
first , the data were collect over a long period of time , <num> year , but the methodolog is unclear .
for exampl , some of the interview were done oral , some by test .
the children were select from on burrow , repres of the counti as a whole , but we do not know what that mean or how it wa done .
we don't know if more than on child wa test in a given famili .
so these ar all unclear , the methodolog wa fundament unclear .
second , the sampl size wa standard to a mil , a thousand , but it is suggest in the paper that the actual number interview were much , much larger .
that in the upper profession categori , for exampl , three wa more near to around on and twenti .
a scale factor of <num> from <num> to <num> .
it seem suggest perhap , then that the entir tabl if scale proportion would lead to <num> , <num> be actual more like <num> , <num> individu in each of the tabl who ar test , but thi is not explicitli said .
and final , that the iq's were resent and rescal .
so that the mean wa exactli at <num> and the standard deviat , the unit spread wa at <num> .
it is not thi , but it could be perhap that said that the design wa to fit to a theoret normal distribut with the mean of <num> and a varianc of <num> or a standard deviat of <num> .
but what wa the process of translat ?
wa there ani unconsci bia ?
or misunderstand of how to massag the data ?
thi is unclear .
