[MUSIC]
We already seen lift and a chi-square
may not be very good measures examining
the transaction data that contains
lots of null transactions, so
what we may like to see is
what are good measures?
They do not influence much by
number of null transactions.
Let's look at those different measures.
Some measure, they have the property
called null-invariance.
That means their values
may not change with
the number of null transactions, okay.
Let's see what measures
are null-invariance,
what measures are not null-invariance.
We already know chi-square and
the lift, they are not null-invariance.
Their value changes with number
of null transactions but
people have found that the folding five
measures, if you check their formula,
their definition,
they are actually null-invariant measures.
So you pretty know, Jaccard coefficient
and cosine measure quite well.
These two measures are properly used,
they are null-invariant but all confidence
which actually take the smaller value
amount A and B as the denominator.
The numerator just the, the transaction
support, the support of the rule,
so the max-confidence is try to find the,
the maximum one of them.
These two, actually, were proposed in
the study of measuring association rules.
Kulczynski measure was proposed
around 2007 by us, by our group.
We, or
we can call these as balanced measure but,
later, the reviewer actually pointed
out that this measure was actually
proposed by a Polish mesh,
mentioning Karl Kulczynski in 1927 so
we changed the name of this
measure to Kulczynski measure.
Let's first look at null invariance,
why they are very important.
That means why in analysis massive
transaction data the null invariance is so
critical because in many,
many transactions the transactions
set contain particular sets of
items the chance actually is
very rare like Walmart transactions,
they may contain neither milk nor coffee.
We will try to analyze milk and coffee
using the falling continuous table, so
this mc means the number of transactions
that contain both milk and coffee.
This not m not c means the number of
transactions that contain neither milk,
nor coffee, so this not m not c is
the number of null transactions,
then we see lift and chi-squared
they're not null-invariant, so they're
not good in invariant data that contain
too many or too few null transactions.
For example, we just look at this,
okay, for this data set,
D1, mc means number of transactions
that contain both milk and coffee.
Not mc means the number of transactions
that contain no milk but coffee.
m not c means the number of transactions
that contains milk but not coffee.
Not m not C means the number of null
transactions that contain neither milk nor
coffee, 'kay, so
you'll probably go to, like, a,
a Walmart, this kind of shopping market.
You'll probably see, that could be the
case is you get ten solvent transactions
that contain milk and coffee, but
one solvent contain not milk, but coffee.
One solvent can have milk but not coffee.
In that case you probably say
actually likely if people buy milk,
they will buy coffee as well,
because there are 10,000 such cases but
only one of them is only one solvent, but
if you have a lot of null transactions,
this value could be quite positive.
If you have very few null transactions
it turn out they are independent.
You could look at the value
they are not independent.
On the other hand, if you see there's
only 100 cases that got milk and
coffee together there are many
more cases they buy it alone, but
once you have many null transactions,
it turns out to be very positive.
The number is quite big, so no matter
you get a very many null transactions or
very few null transactions,
something may go wrong, so
we do need to analyze such data
using some null-invariant measures.
And we'll examine this in more detail.
[MUSIC]

