Welcome back, to the course on audio
signal processing for music applications.
In the previous demo class,we introduce audacity,
which was a sound editor quite useful to
do a small edits and visualizing sound.
In this class will introduce
another sound tool,
SonicVisualizer, which is quite
complementary to audacity.
It's more oriented towards research and
it has a lot of capabilities for
analyzing and visualizing advanced aspects of sound.
This is a tool that was developed at Queen Mary in London.
And it's available under all the common platforms and
distributed with very open license, the GNU public license.
So it's a very good tool.
I recommend you very much to install it and use it.
And that will be quite useful for for the class.
So let's first go to where to get it.
You type Google Sonic Visualizer it's,
it will showed the the page of SonicVisualizer.org.
And in it you'll find a lot of information about it and
projects that have been using this tool.
And also something that we will talk a little bit about it.
Is the plugin system that it was developed together.
The Sonic Visualizer, which is these VAMP plugins.
Many people have developed analysis tools for
Sonic Visualizer using this plugin system, so we will be able to have access to
quite a bit, of algorithms and analysis tools for sound.
If you go to download page you can get it for all these common platforms.
In this class we use Ubuntu so we downloaded the Ubuntu version.
I already did that.
So let's go directly to the program.
This is the main interface of Sonic Visualizer.
And the first thing we, we do is open a sound file.
This directory where I keep all the files, I will be using in class.
So for example let's, use this speech female sound.
Okay? This is the, the waveform you can
of course zoom in yeah, with these two wheels.
That's quite nice, and we can play it.
>> This is the V of Vendetta.
Okay the navigation is quite good and quite powerful.
The, navigate through the whole sound,so it allows us to,
zoom in into particular parts that we want to analyze.
A basic concept of Sonic Visualizer is the idea of panes and layers.
Panes are basically these windows so this is a,
a pane in which we're displaying the,
the, the wave form.
Let's, for example open another pane.
Which is for example the spectrogram that we mentioned also with audacity.
So in here, we're visualizing the pane of the spectrogram.
And here, the control of the analysis parameters is a little bit easier.
So we have it right here on, on the right side.
So, for example we can increase the window size and
then we can zoom quite more easily and, see the harmonics of this speech sound.
And also we see the silences, and
we see the areas in which there is some consonants like these more
darker areas in the waveform which
corresponds to these areas here.
Okay, so that's that's quite good for example we can close this pane and
now open another pane which is a very useful one,
which is the spectrum, which is basically one slice of the spectrogram.
Then so we move the, the waveform,
the cursor in the waveform,
the spectrum changes.
Here by default the scale, the horizontal
scale, which is what is called the bins,
is in locked scale you really like better to use it in the linear scale.
So this is the a linear scale of the, of the spectrum and
normally you would like to zoom in or
at least show the spectrum in a way that it optimizes the whole range,
display of range so that would be a good way to display.
Okay?
This is quite intuitive and we can try
to understand things about the sound.
So for example here,
being in a voice part of the sound,
we see the peaks of the the harmonics.
We use the shade that we see here
are kind of the formants of the voice.
So that's quite nice.
And of course we can change the parameters quite easily.
Let's go back to
the pane of the spectrogram.
Okay, and now we want to talk about the,
the, the plugins system that it offers.
So in here, okay,
we display the spectrogram in a way that might be quite appropriate.
And now I I install several plugins but
first let's
go to that page of Sonic Visualizer and
we can go to the, the plugin page.
This here a description of the plugin
system of Sonic Visualizer.
And it explains how it works.
And in fact, how to develop for it.
And there is a link to
a list of the plugins
that have been developed
with with the system.
And there is quite a lot.
There is quite a lot.
So I downloaded a few.
So we would go back to
the the Sonic Visualizer program.
And now here for example,
in transform
there is a list of all the plugins that I have installed.
And for example,
let's use this audio pitch detector.
And let's click at that and this is the interface for the analysis.
So, these are plugin developed by Paul and
the plugin actually was
coded by Chris Cannam And it uses one algorithm, which is the YIN algorithm.
It's a, it's a algorithm that we will talk about in class,
for detecting the fundamental pitch of a sound,
which is an implementation using the Fast Fourier Transform.
And they just say okay, okay
so what this does is analyzes
the whole sound and
displays the fundamental frequency.
And it's displayed on top of
the spectrogram, as a layer.
So this is the other concept that I,
I was mentioning it.
So the layers are ways to display
several things on top of the same pane.
So here we are seeing,
the, the spectrogram and
on top of it a layer with the pitch
curve that I have analyzed.
So if we zoom we see clearly these
green pitch curve and we will discuss this in class but
we can see that is identifying
the first harmonic of the sound and
in some areas that there is no harmonics.
It really, it's it gets confused.
But in the,
the voice part, in the parts that are harmonic, it finds it quite easily.
If we change the, the window size of the spectrogram, bigger so
we see the line more clearer.
Then maybe this becomes more obvious.
And and we can see that the pitch analysis did a decent job
in identifying the fundamental
frequency of of this speech sound.
Okay, and that's all I wanted
to mention for Sonic Visualizer.
Let's go back to the slides.
So you can go to the Sonic Visualizer page
to get information about the program.
There is the plugin VAMP plugin it
has a special page that you can
access to it from
the Sonic Visualizer page.
We mention about the YIN Pitch detection
algorithm that we will cover later on and
the, quite a few references about it.
And the speech sound came
up came from freesound.
And that's all for today so we introduced
another Sound Visualization tool,
that's going to be quite useful for
the more advanced and
scientific visualization that
We'll talk about in class.
So, thank you very much and I, I will see you in the next class.
