In this video we'll define something
called the cost function. This will let us
figure out how to fit the best possible
straight line to our data. In linear
regression we have a training set like
that shown here. Remember our notation M
was the number of training examples. So
maybe M=47. And the form of the
hypothesis, which we use to make
predictions, is this linear function. To
introduce a little bit more terminology,
these theta zero and theta one, right,
these theta i's are what I call the
parameters of the model. What we're
going to do in this video is talk about
how to go about choosing these two
parameter values, theta zero and theta
one. With different choices of parameters
theta zero and theta one we get different
hypotheses, different hypothesis
functions. I know some of you will
probably be already familiar with what I'm
going to do on this slide, but just to
review here are a few examples. If theta
zero is 1.5 and theta one is 0, then
the hypothesis function will look like
this. Right, because your hypothesis
function will be h( x) equals 1.5 plus
0 times x which is this constant value
function, this is flat at 1.5. If
theta zero equals 0 and theta one
equals 0.5, then the hypothesis will look
like this. And it should pass through this
point (2, 1), says you now have h(x) or
really some h<u>theta(x) but
sometimes I'll just omit theta for</u>
brevity. So, h(x) will be equal to just
0.5 times x which looks like that. And
finally if theta zero equals 1 and theta
one equals 0.5 then we end up with the
hypothesis that looks like this. Let's
see, it should pass through the (2, 2)
point like so. And this is my new h(x)
or my new h<u>theta(x). All right? Well</u>
you remember that this is
h<u>theta(x) but as a shorthand</u>
sometimes I just write this as h(x). In
linear regression we have a training set,
like maybe the one I've plotted here. What
we want to do is come up with values for
the parameters theta zero and theta one.
So that the straight line we get out
of this corresponds to a straight line
that somehow fits the data well. Like
maybe that line over there. So how do we
come up with values theta zero, theta one
that corresponds to a good fit to the
data? The idea is we're going to choose
our parameters theta zero, theta one so
that h(x), meaning the value we predict
on input x, that this at least close to
the values y for the examples in our
training set, for our training examples.
So, in our training set we're given a
number of examples where we know x decides
the house and we know the actual price of
what it's sold for. So let's try to
choose values for the parameters so that
at least in the training set, given the
x's in the training set, we make
reasonably accurate predictions for the y
values. Let's formalize this. So linear
regression, what we're going to do is that I'm
going to want to solve a minimization
problem. So I'm going to write minimize over theta
zero, theta one. And, I want this to be
small, right, I want the difference
between h(x) and y to be small. And one
thing I'm gonna do is try to minimize the
square difference between the output of
the hypothesis and the actual price of the
house. Okay? So let's fill in some
details. Remember that I was using the
notation (x(i), y(i)) to represent the
ith training example. So what I
want really is to sum over my training
set. Sum from i equals 1 to M of
the square difference between
this is the prediction of my hypothesis
when it is input the size of house number
i, right, minus the actual price that
house number i will sell for and I want to
minimize the sum of my training set sum
from i equals 1 through M of the
difference of this squared error,
square difference between the predicted
price of the house and the price
that it will actually sell for. And just
remind you of your notation M here was
the, the size of my training set, right,
so the M there is my number of training
examples. Right? That hash sign is the
abbreviation for "number" of training
examples. Okay? And to make some of our,
make the math a little bit easier, I'm
going to actually look at, you know, 1
over M times that. So we're going to try
to minimize my average error, which we're
going to minimize one by 2M.
Putting the 2, the constant one half, in
front it just makes some of the math a
little easier. So minimizing one half of
something, right, should give you the same
values of the parameters theta zero, theta
one as minimizing that function. And just
make sure this, this, this equation is
clear, right? This expression in here,
h<u>theta(x), this is my, this is</u>
our usual, right? That's equal to this
plus theta one x(i). And, this notation,
minimize over theta zero and theta one,
this means find me the values of theta
zero and theta one that causes this
expression to be minimized. And this
expression depends on theta zero and theta
one. Okay? So just to recap, we're posing
this problem as find me the values of
theta zero and theta one so that the
average already one over two M times the
sum of square errors between my
predictions on the training set minus the
actual values of the houses on the
training set is minimized. So this is
going to be my overall objective function
for linear regression. And just to, you
know rewrite this out a little bit more
cleanly what I'm going to do by convention
is we usually define a cost function.
Which is going to be exactly this. That
formula that I have up here. And what I
want to do is minimize over theta zero and
theta one my function J of theta zero
comma theta one. Just write this
out, this is my cost function. So, this
cost function is also called the squared
error function or sometimes called the
square error cost function and it turns
out that Why, why do we, you know, take
the squares of the errors? It turns out
that the squared error cost function is a
reasonable choice and will work well for
most problems, for most regression
problems. There are other cost functions
that will work pretty well, but the squared
error cost function is probably the most
commonly used one for regression problems.
Later in this class we'll also talk about alternative
cost functions as well, but this, this
choice that we just had, should be a
pret-, pretty reasonable thing to try for
most linear regression problems. Okay. So
that's the cost function. So far we've
just seen a mathematical definition of you
know this cost function and in case this
function J of theta zero theta one in case
this function seems a little bit abstract
and you still don't have a good sense of
what its doing in the next video, in the
next couple videos we're actually going to
go a little bit deeper into what the cost
function J is doing and try to give you
better intuition about what its computing
and why we want to use it.
