In this video, I want to just quickly step you
through the logistics of how to work on
homeworks in this class and how to use the
submission system which will let you verify
right away that you got the right answer for
your machine learning program exercise.
Here's my Octave window and
let's first go to my desktop.
I saved the files for my first exercise,
some of the files on my desktop:
in this directory, 'ml-class-ex1'.
And we provide a number files
and ask you to edit some of them.
So the first file should meet the details in
the pdf file for this programming exercise.
But one of the files we ask you to edit is
this file called warmUpExercise.m, where the
exercise is really just to make sure that
you're familiar with the submission system.
And all you need to do is
return the 5x5 identity matrix.
So the solution to this exercise I just
showed you is to write A = eye(5).
So that modifies this function to
generate the 5x5 identity matrix.
And this function warmUpExercise()
now returns the 5x5 identity matrix.
And I'm just going to save it.
So I've done the first part of this homework.
Going back to my Octave window,
let's now go to my directory,
'C:\Users\ang\Desktop\ml-class-ex1'.
And if I want to make sure that I've implemented
this, type 'warmUpExercise()' like so.
And yup, it returns the 5x5 identity matrix
that we just wrote the code to create.
And I can now submit the code as follows.
I'm going to type 'submit()' in this
directory and I'm ready to submit part 1
so I'm going to enter choice '1'.
So it asks me for my email address.
I'm going go to the course website.
This is an internal testing site, so your version
of the website may look a little bit different.
But that's my email address and this is my submission
password, and I'm just going to type them in here.
So I have ang@cs.stanford.edu and
my submission password is 9yC75USsGf.
I'm going to hit enter; it connects to the server
and submits it, and right away
it tells you "Congratulations! You have
successfully completed Homework 1 Part 1".
And this gives you a verification
that you got this part right.
And if you don't submit the right answer,
then it will give you a message indicating
that you haven't quite gotten it right yet.
And you can use this submission password and
you can generate new passwords; it doesn't matter.
But you can also use your regular website
login password, but because this password
here is typed in clear text on your monitor,
we gave you this extra submission password
in case you don't want to type in your
website's normal password onto a window
that, depending on your operating system,
may or may not appear as text when you type
it into the Octave submission script.
So, that's how you submit the
homeworks after you've done it.
Good luck, and, when you get around to
homeworks, I hope you get all of them right.
And finally, in the next and final Octave
tutorial video, I want to tell you about
vectorization, which is a way to get your
Octave code to run much more efficiently.
