In the last few videos, we talked
about how to do forward-propagation
and back-propagation in a
neural network in order to compute derivatives.
But back prop as an algorithm
has a lot of details and,
you know, can be a little
bit tricky to implement.
And one unfortunate property is
that there are many
ways to have subtle bugs in back
prop so that if
you run it with gradient descent
or some other optimization algorithm, it could actually look like it's working.
And, you know, your cost function J
of theta may end up
decreasing on every iteration
of gradient descent, but this
could pull through even though
there might be some bug in your implementation of back prop.
So it looks like J of
theta is decreasing, but you
might just wind up with
a neural network that
has a higher level of error
than you would with a bug-free
implementation and you might
just not know that there
was this subtle bug that's giving
you this performance.
So what can we do about this?
There's an idea called gradient checking
that eliminates almost all of these problems.
So today, every time I
implement back propagation or a
similar gradient descent algorithm on
the neural network or any other
reasonably complex model, I
always implement gradient checking.
And if you do this it will
help you make sure and
sort of gain high confidence that
your implementation of forward prop
and back prop or whatever, is 100% correct.
And in what I've seen
this pretty much all the
problems associated with sort of
a buggy implementation of the background.
And in the previous videos,
I sort of ask you to take on
faith that the formulas I
gave for computing the deltas, and the
D's, and so on, I ask
you to take on faith that those
actually do compute the gradients
of the cost function, but once
you implement numerical gradient checking,
which is the topic of this video,
you'll be able to verify for
yourself that the code you're
writing is indeed computing
the derivative of the cost
function J. 
So here's the idea.
Consider the following example.
Suppose I have the function
J of theta, and I
have some value, theta, and
for this example, I'm going to assume that theta is just a real number.
And let's say I want to estimate the derivative of this function at this point.
And so the derivative is, you know, equal
to the slope of that sort of tangent line.
Here's how I'm going to numerically
approximate the derivative, or
rather here's a procedure for numerically
approximating the derivative: I'm
going to compute theta plus epsilon,
so value a little bit to the right.
And we are going to compute theta minus epsilon.
And I'm going to look
at those two points and connect
them by a straight line.
And I'm going to connect
these two points by a straight
line and I'm going to
use the slope of that
little red line as my
approximation to the derivative,
which is the true derivative is
the slope of the blue line over there.
So, you know, it seems like it would be a pretty good approximation.
Mathematically, the slope of this
red line is this vertical
height, divided by this
horizontal width, so this
point on top is J of
theta plus epsilon. This point
here is J of theta minus epsilon.
So this vertical difference is j
of theta plus epsilon, minus J
of theta, minus epsilon, and
this horizontal distance is just 2 epsilon.
So, my approximation is going
to be that the derivative,
with respect to theta of J of
theta--add this value of
theta--that that's approximately J
of theta plus epsilon, minus
J of theta, minus epsilon, over 2 epsilon.
Usually, I use a pretty
small value for epsilon and
set epsilon to be maybe
on the order of 10 to the minus 4.
There's usually a large range
of different values for epsilon that work just fine.
And in fact, if you
let epsilon become really small
then, mathematically, this term here
actually, mathematically, you know,
becomes the derivative, becomes exactly
the slope of the function at this point.
It's just that we don't want
to use epsilon that's too, too
small because then you might run into numerical problems.
So, you know, I usually use
epsilon around 10 to the minus 4, say.
And by the way some of you may
have seen it alternative formula for
estimating the derivative which is this formula.
This one on the right is called the one-sided difference.
Whereas, the formula on the left that's called a two-sided difference.
The two-sided difference gives
us a slightly more accurate estimate,
so I usually use that rather
than just this one-sided difference estimate.
So, concretely, what you implement
in Octave is you implement the following.
You implement call to compute, gradApprox
which is going to
be approximation to zero relative
as just, you know, this formula: J of
theta plus epsilon, minus J of theta,
minus epsilon, divided by two times epsilon.
And this will give you a
numerical estimate of the gradient at that point.
And in this example it seems like it's a pretty good estimate.
Now, on the previous slide,
we consider the case of
when theta was a real number.
Now, let's look at the more
general case of where theta is a vector parameter.
So let's say theta is an
Rn, and it might be unreal
version of the parameters of
our neural network. So
theta is a vector that
has n elements, theta 1
up to theta n. We
can then use a similar idea
to approximate all of the partial derivative terms.
Concretely, the partial derivative
of a cost function with respect
to the first parameter theta
1, that can be
obtained by taking J and increasing theta 1.
So you have J of theta 1 plus epsilon, and so on
minus J of this theta
1 minus epsilon and divide it by 2 epsilon.
The partial derivative respect to
the second parameter theta 2, is
again this thing, except you're
taking J of, here you're
increasing theta 2 by epsilon.
And here you're decreasing theta 2 by epsilon.
And so on down to the
derivative with respect to
theta n. Would be if you
increase and decrease theta n
by epsilon over there.
So, these equations give
you a way to numerically approximate
the partial derivative of "J"
with respect to any one of your parameters they derive.
Concretely, what you implement is therefore, the following.
We implement the following in Octave
to numerically compute the derivatives.
We say for i equals 1
through n where n is
the dimension of our parameter vector theta.
And I usually do this with the unrolled version of the parameters.
So you know theta is just
a long list of all of my parameters in my neural networks.
I'm going to set theta plus equals
theta, then increase theta plus
the ith element by epsilon.
And so this is basically
theta plus is equal to theta
except for theta plus i,
which is now incremented by epsilon.
So if theta plus
is equal to, right, theta
1, theta 2, and so on and then theta
i has epsilon added to
it, and then it go down to
theta n. So this is what theta plus is.
And similarly these two
lines set theta minus to
something similar except that
this, instead of theta i
plus epsilon, this now becomes theta i minus epsilon.
And then finally, you implement
this gradApprox i,
and this will give you
your approximation to the partial
derivative with respect to
theta i of J of theta.
And the way we use this
in our neural network implementation is
we would implement this, implement this
FOR loop to compute, you know, the top partial
derivative of the cost
function with respect to every parameter in our network.
And we can then take the
gradient that we got from back prop.
So DVec was the derivatives
we got from back prop.
Right, so back prop, back-propagation was
a relatively efficient way to
compute the derivatives or the
partial derivatives of a
cost function with respect to all of our parameters.
And what I usually do
is then take my numerically
computed derivative, that is
this gradApprox that we
just had from up here and
make sure that that is
equal or approximately equal
up to, you know, small values
of numerical round off that is
pretty close to the DVec that I got from back prop.
And if these two ways
of computing the derivative give me
the same answer or at least give me
very similar answers, you know, up to a few decimal places.
Then I'm much more confident that
my implementation of back prop is correct.
And when I plug these DVec
vectors into gradient descent
or some advanced optimization algorithm,
I can then be much
more confident that I'm computing
the derivatives correctly and therefore,
that hopefully my codes will
run correctly and do a
good job optimizing J of theta.
Finally, I want to put
everything together and tell you
how to implement this numerical gradient checking.
Here's what I usually do.
First thing I do, is implement
back-propagation to compute defects.
So, this is a procedure we talked
about in an earlier video to
compute DVec which may be our unrolled version of these matrices.
Then what I do, is implement
a numerical gradient checking to compute gradApprox.
So this is what I described earlier in this video, in the previous slide.
Then you should make sure that DVec and gradApprox
gives similar values, you know, let's say up to a few decimal places.
And finally, and this
the important step, the more
you start to use your code
for learning, for seriously training
your network, it is important to turn off gradient checking.
And to no longer compute
this gradApprox thing using
the numerical derivative formulas that
we talked about earlier in this
video.
And the reason for that is the
numeric code gradient checking code,
the stuff we talked about in
this video, that's a very
computationally expensive, that's a
very slow way to try to approximate the derivative.
Whereas in contrast, the back-propagation
algorithm that we talked about
earlier, that is the
thing that we talked about earlier
for computing, you know, D1, D2,
D3, or for DVec. Back prop is
a much more computationally efficient way of computing the derivatives.
So once you've verified that
your implementation of back-propagation is
correct, you should turn
off gradient checking, and just stop using that.
So just to reiterate, you
should be sure to disable your
gradient checking code before running
your algorithm for many
iterations of gradient descent, or
for many iterations of the
advanced optimization algorithms in
order to train your classifier.
Concretely, if you were
to run numerical gradient checking
on every single integration of gradient
descent, or if you were in the
inner loop of your cost function,
then your code will be very slow.
Because the numerical gradient checking
code is much slower than
the back-propagation algorithm, than
a back-propagation method where you
remember we were computing delta
4, delta 3, delta 2, and so on.
That was the back-propagation algorithm.
That is a much faster way to compute derivatives than gradient checking.
So when you're ready, once
you verify the implementation of back-propagation
is correct, make sure you
turn off, or you disable
your gradient checking code while
you train your algorithm, or else your code could run very slowly.
So that's how you take gradients numerically.
And that's how you can verify that
your implementation of back-propagation is correct.
Whenever I implement back-propagation or
similar gradient descent algorithm for
a complicated model, I always use gradient checking.
This really helps me make sure that my code is correct.
