[SOUND] So in this module we're going to
be looking at visualization systems.
So before we do that,
we should nail down some concepts.
And so there's going to be several
concepts that we'll need to review and
introduce on these visualization
systems that'll be helpful.
The first one we've seen before
is information visualization.
We've used that as a term to
describe the plotting of data
that uses different coordinates
than what was provided.
In information visualization as
opposed to scientific visualization or
other domain visualization where the data
comes to you in a more concrete metaphor,
information visualization the information
is much more abstract, and so
the challenge is going to be being able
to take that abstract information and
find a concrete metaphor to
communicate it to the viewer, so
it can be more easily understood.
The second is large data visualization.
We often hear of big data and
there's also big data visualization.
The focus of big data or large data
visualization is sometimes just on
the computation mechanics of
handling large data sets.
But we're going to focus specifically on
the visualization of large data, where
the data is so large that it's visually
overwhelming if you display everything,
and so you have to be very
selective about what you display so
that you can keep it mentally organized.
And so, we're going to depend on
interactivity, the interactive aspect
of these visualization system
to be able to, over time,
focus on certain elements of our
visualization that we're interested in,
and to be able to ignore other elements so
that these data sets,
which would be very large, don't
overwhelm our cognitive understandings.
Third is visual analytics, visual
analytics is an area that grew out of
business analytics and
business intelligence, and
it's specifically on visualization, being
able to look at data sets visually and
to be able to analyze them,
draw conclusions from them,
and it focuses also on being able to
make a decision based on data and
that decision is implied by
the visualization, that the visualization
is giving you the insight in order to
make a good decision based on your data.
And finally the goal of this week is
to make a visualization dashboard.
We want to be able to organize
the visualizations when we have multiple
visualizations and we have a lot of data.
We'll want to be able to produce
a dashboard view that gives you everything
you need in order to be able to make
a good decision based on the data.
So those are some of the terms,
some of the main concepts we use when
we talk about visualization system.
We start with information
visualization but our goal for
the week is going to be to understand
how to make a visualization dashboard,
how to make a visualization system
that we can use to make decisions
[MUSIC]

