In this segment I will give a brief
introduction to the task of part of
speech tagging and then we'll come back
and see how discriminative sequence models
can be used as a technique for part of
speech tagging. There are many linguistic
traditions in different parts of the globe, 
but in the west the idea of parts of speech
perhaps started with Aristotle in the 
fourth century before the common era,
and he suggested the idea that there
were parts of speech, which are otherwise
known as lexical categories, word classes,
tags, or POS is a common abbreviation.
But what we think of today
as the parts of speech are normally
attributed to Dionysius Thrax of
Alexandria who proposed that there were
eight parts of speech. And that's the
number that's still with us today as the
number of parts of speech people get
taught in school sometime. Though actually
if you look into the details a little the
eight parts of speech that Dionysius Thrax
proposed aren't the same that are with us
today. So the normal list that people are
taught in schools in English now are noun,
verb, adjective, adverb, preposition,
conjunction, pronoun, interjection. But
for Thrax there was actually some little
differences in the list. And of course he
was working with Ancient Greek, and not
with English. So the beginning of the list
starts out the same, but note that he
doesn't recognize adjective as a part of
speech. In Greek and Latin adjectives and
nouns behave very similarly. But he does
recognize participle as a part of speech.
And then the other difference, is that a
separate part of speech is, is given for
articles, words like the and a. Whereas
in the modern list, you get a class for
interjections. The status of the articles
has always been a bit controversial.
In our current standard set of eight parts
of speech, articles are seen as a case of
adjectives but actually, as soon as you
start looking at the grammar of languages
like English, that the articles have a
very special behavior which is quite
different from regular adjectives. For
example, adjectives, you can get multiple
of: large green leather couch. Whereas you
can't do things like the a this book,
except as a kind of speech hesitation as
to which article you should be using.
When we do part of speech tagging in
computational linguistics, we normally
work with rather more than eight parts of
speech, because there are a lot of distinctions
which can be useful to make that 
multiplies the number of parts of speech.
And I, so I start to indicate the kinds of 
parts of speech you get in this slide
and you can see that there are various 
hierarchical groupings. So inside nouns,
we can divide into proper nouns and common 
nouns, and we might also want to divide
between singular and plural which would 
happen with both proper and common nouns.
Verbs very much divide into main verbs,
see, registered; versus various
auxiliary and modal verbs like can and
had. There are adjectives and adverbs.
Note that adjectives, at least the short
adjectives in English have several forms:
the positive, comparative, and
superlative. And we might want to
distinguish those forms as well. Neither
of the lists on the last slide had numbers
but they seem a fairly obvious and
practically useful part of speech to
recognize. And then similarly here among
the closed classes, I'll say a bit more
about closed classes on the next slide, we
don't have a category that's called
articles, we have a category called
determiners. So the modern linguistic
tradition is to group the articles, a and
the, together with certain other
demonstratives that behave similarly.
Words like some, this. And then we have
some other categories. Prepositions are
familiar but we're distinguishing off a
class of particles. So the particles here
are words that are normally the same as
prepositions but take part in English
phrasal verb constructions, things like
made up, meaning to invent. The top level
distinction on the last slide was between
open classes and closed classes. It's very
clear that not all parts of speech are the
same. Some of them like determiners and
pronouns are occupied by only a small set
of words. So in English, for pronouns
there's he, she, it, him, her and the
first and second person pronouns I, you,
we. The third person plural they, them.
But it's just a very small set of words
and that there aren't new pronouns being
invented. And so things like that we call
closed class because in general closed
classes don't get new members. Though you
know sometimes occasionally they do over
long term language change. So, sometimes
people have suggested that we should be
inventing some new gender neutral pronouns
in English, though nothing's really taken
off. But in contrast the open classes,
nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, these
are classes which have a vast number of
members and beyond that it's very easy for
them to gain new members so that when we
have a new protocol in computer science we
create a new noun for it like SSH and then
very quickly we decide it's useful to use
that as a verb as well and then we say I
SSHed in to my server to fix the
configuration. The task of part of speech
tagging is to say, for each word, what its
part of speech is in the context of some
running text. The reason why that's not
trivial is because lots of words have more
than one part of speech. So, for example,
for the word back, it can be an adjective
when it's modifying a noun, like the back door.
It can be a noun when it's referring
to the body part, on my back. It can be an
adverb, in a phrase like win the voters
back and it can also be then a verb in
another political example promise to back
the bill. And so what we're wanting to do
is when we see an instance of the word
back assign it to one of these parts of speech.
So in the task of part of speech
tagging, we start with some text,
plays well with others. And then for each
word we consider what are its possible
parts of speech, so that plays can be a
plural noun or verb. Well can be an
interjection, an adjective, a noun or an
adverb. With can be, is just a
preposition here, and others is a plural noun.
And so for the words that are ambiguous,
we're then going to choose for them what
the correct part of speech is in context.
And so here, plays is a verb, and well is
an adverb modifying plays. And we get
disambiguating these parts of speech. So
what we're finding here at the end, when
we've got, you know, these choices here
which we are then determining, these are
our part of speech tags. And depending on
the part of speech tag set, there are
commonly in natural language processing
applications somewhere between twelve and
100 part of speech tags that are
differentiated. And so you can see that
this set of part of speech tags is
differentiating things like is it a plural
noun or a singular noun, here's a singular
noun. Or if it is a verb, what form of the
verb it is. So this is the third person
singular plays as opposed to play. So the
particular part-of-speech tag set that
we're seeing here is the Penn Treebank
part-of-speech tags, which are the most
commonly used part-of-speech tags for
English, especially in the United States.
I'm embarrassed to say that I've been in
this business long enough that I can
actually tell you off by heart what all
the Penn part-of-speech tags are. There
are a set of 45 of them, which cover word
classes like this, and punctuation. So,
what good is part of speech tagging?
As well as letting you answer your high 
school English problems, it has a variety of
other uses. It has some particular uses
where just parts of speech are sufficient so
that if you're doing text to speech and
you want, and you see an instance of the
word L-E-A-D you want to know whether to
pronoun it as lead or lead. And the answer
to that is well, what's its part of
speech? If it's a verb it's lead. If it's a
noun it's lead. Having parts of speech
lets you easily do some surface linguistic
analysis. So for lots of applications it's
useful to pick out what we call base noun
phrases. So they're a noun or noun compound,
possibly modified in front by a determiner
and some adjectives. So the nearest school
or, an old green couch are base noun
phrases whereas big complex
noun phrases with relative clauses
after them aren't. If we have parts of
speech we can easily write regular
expressions that pick out things like base
noun phrases or verbs followed by a
particle for phrasal verbs. And that can
be used for a lot of applications where you
want to do shallow processing but
nevertheless want to be able to put,
to give to the user multiword
keywords or something like that.
Part of speech tagging is commonly used 
as input to, or to speed up a parser,
so quite a few parsers work on already part 
of speech tagged text, and even ones that can do
their own part of speech tagging can often
be sped up by first doing the process of
part of speech tagging. Finally a lot of
models we build for probability estimation
are very sparse if they try and work at the
word level. And we discussed various ways of
backing off, where you might back off from
a trigram to a bigram earlier. But another
common way of backing off is to back off
from a word that you don't know much about
to its part of speech category. You can
predict based on knowing it's an
adjective. Part of speech tagging
performance is normally measured as
accuracy. What percent of tags do you get
right? And the answer to that, that for
the best current taggers, they get about
97 percent of words right. That sounds
really good. It is important to realize
that part of speech tagging is in some
sense an easy task or at least a task
where you get high numbers. So there's a
baseline approach to part of speech
tagging where you tag every word with its
most common tag, if you know about it in your
training data and if you don't know about
it in your training data, you tag it as a
noun. And it turns out that that very
fairly simple baseline method already
gives you performance of 90%. And so
that's, it turns out that you get this
high baseline for a couple of reasons. One
reason is that many words are unambiguous,
that if you see famous, it's always an
adjective. And also the way part of speech
tagging is normally measured, that you get
points for every token. So not only do you
get points for every instance of
unambiguous articles, which are very
common like the and a, you even
get points for getting the part of speech
tags of punctuation right. But that doesn't
mean that all parts of speech decisions
are easy. Some part of speech decisions
are quite difficult, even for human
beings. And so here are some examples of
the word around. So here we have around
acting as a particle, got around to. Here
we have around again straight after a verb
but this time it's this prepositional
phrase, around the corner, and so around
is being a preposition. And here again in
this third example, around is again
following straight after a verb but
actually this time it's a modifier of this
noun phrase of around 250, short for
around $250. And so around is then an
adverb; it's modifying a number which is
kind of like an adjective. It turns out
that in an English corpus, around eleven
percent of the word types are ambiguous
with regard to part of speech. That
doesn't sound like very many, but most of
them tend to be common words, such as the
word that. So that can be a word that
introduces a subordinate clause and in the
Penn treebank those words were tagged as 
IN preposition, which might surprise you;
there's some linguistic argument about
that. It can be a determiner, that play, or
it can be an adverb. So modifying
here far, that far, is an adverb. And so
it turns out that although only eleven
percent of the word types are ambiguous as
to part of speech, about 40 percent of the
word tokens are ambiguous, so there
actually are a lot of decisions for a part
of speech tagger to make. Okay, I hope
that's given you a bit of background
information on part of speech tagging so
you can make sense of the task in terms of
our methods for approaching it.
