In this segment I'm going to return to
dependency parsing. Right in the first
segment, I introduced the idea of
dependency syntax, but let's look again at
how that worked. So the idea of dependency
syntax is you connect up the words of a
sentence by putting arrows between them
that show relationships of being
modifiers or arguments of other words. So
here, in this example, we've got the head
of the whole sentence submitted and it's
got its dependents, so it's got bills
submitted by somebody and then also the
auxiliary verb were. Now, not necessarily,
but quite commonly the arrows are typed by
the name of some grammatic relation. And
so we can see that here, where we've got
the subject of a passive, the verbal
auxiliary, and the prepositional
relationship. The other things that you
should know about is just a bit of the
terminology. So firstly when we have an
arrow we always have the thing that is the
head, or the governor, here submitted,
and the thing that is the dependent,
modifier, inferior; various words are
used as you can see over here, here bills.
So that they're the two ends, the governor and
the governed thing of a dependency.
Now, beyond that there's actually some
inconsistency about how things are done.
So in these slides and in the original
dependency grammar work of Tesnière
the arrows run from the governor to the
dependent. But you can absolutely also
find other work that points the arrows the
other way. And actually if like here
you're using height in the tree to show
what's dependent of what, you actually
don't need to have any arrows at all. You
could just draw these on lines without any
arrowhead on them. Okay, so, as in this
example, normally what you find is that
dependencies form a tree. So that there's
a root node, and then, from there,
everything heads down with words having a
single head, and in a nice acyclic manner.
I should mention also that it's actually
quite common to add sort of one pseudo
node at the top, often called root or wall
which points at the head of the sentence.
That actually makes things a lot cleaner,
both in terms of the parsing algorithms
but also in terms of things like
evaluation and representation because then you
get the property that every word of the
sentence including the root is the
dependent of one thing. And so you can
think of it as doing an assignment
process of working out what is the
governor of each word of the sentence.
How does dependency grammar relate to the
kind of phrase structure grammar
that we've concentrated on so far? Well, the
central innovation is really that
dependency grammar is built around the
notion of having heads and dependents, whereas
the basic case of a context-free grammar,
there's no notion of a head whatsoever.
And actually things have moved on from
there. If you look at modern ex, modern
linguistic theory, that means things like
X-bar grammar to linguists, or our modern
statistical parsers whether the
Charniak-Collins or Stanford parser. All
of them have a notion of head and use it
extensively. So for example, in all these
parsers, there's a notion of head rules
where it'll identify some category as the
head of a larger category. And as soon as
you have head rules of the kind that we
discussed before, well then you can
straightforwardly get the dependencies out
of a phrase structure representation.
So, basically you kind of have a spine of head
chains, and then everywhere you have
something coming off that, that's a
dependent. So we have a dependency from
walked to Sue, and a dependency from walked
into, this is another head chain, and then
we've got another dependency from into
store, head chain, and dependency, store the.
So, we have the basis for a dependency
representation inside a phrase
structured tree if and only if, we have
heads represented. What about if we go in
the opposite direction? If you try and go
from dependencies to phrase structure, you
can reconstruct a phrase structure tree by
taking the closure of the dependencies of
a word, and saying that those represent a
constituent. But it slightly changes the
representation from what we normally see
in phrase structure trees. In particular,
in a situation like this, you can't have a
VP node. Because actually, both
Sue and into are dependents of
walked, and therefore all three of those
must have a flat phrase structure
representation, where you have the three,
the head and its two dependents
Sue and into. How do people go about
doing dependency parsing? A whole variety
of methods have been used for dependency
parsing. One method to do it is with a
dynamic programming algorithm like the CKY
algorithm that we saw for phrase structure
parsing. Now if you do this naively by
adding in heads, you end up with something
similar to the lexicalized probabilistic
context free grammars we saw earlier, and
end up with a big O n to the fifth
algorithm. But there's a clever
reformulation of what the parse items are
due to Jason Eisner in 1996 which
makes the complexity of doing dependency
parsing also N cubed. Which is kind of
what you'd hope it to be, just thinking
about the nature of the operation. But
there are a whole bunch of other methods.
So people have directly used graph
algorithms to do dependency parsing. So,
one idea from the algorithm's literature
is that you can construct a maximum
spanning tree for a sentence. Because,
since you want all words connected
together, to be the dependent of
something, that means you have to build a
tree that spans all the words in the
sentence. And that's the idea that's used
in the well known MST parser. There are
other ideas of constraint satisfaction
where you start off with a dense set of
edges between all words and then
eliminate ones that don't satisfy hard
constraints. But a final trained
independency parsing and actually what
we're going to focus on here, is a way of doing
dependency parsing where you head left to
right through the sentence and make greedy
decisions based on machine learning
classifiers as to which words to connect
to other words as dependents. And so the
most well known example of this framework is
MaltParser, and I'm going to concentrate
on this just partly because it's very different from
what we did for our approach to phrase
structure parsing we looked at in depth,
but also because it's been shown that this
kind of method of doing dependency parsing
actually works extremely well. It can work
accurately, and exceedingly quickly. So
it's just a good thing to know about as a
different point in the space. No matter
how we do dependency parsing we need some
sources of information to let us choose
between possible analyses and which words
to take as dependents of, of other words.
So here's a list of the main
sources of information people use. So, the
most obvious source of information is
bilexical dependencies. So if we have
something like a dependency between issues
and the. Well we can look at the word
that's the head and look at the word of
the, that's the dependent and say is that
likely. That's similar to the bilexical
dependencies of our earlier lexicalized
PCFGs. But we don't want to use that as
our only source of information partly
because lexical information is so sparse.
And there are several other good sources of
information. So let's just go through
those. So one is the distance between the
head and the dependent, And if you look at
this picture, what you'll see is that most
dependencies are short. They're with
nearby words. There are a couple of
exceptions. So, this dependency here is a
pretty long one. But most of them are
pretty short. Other sources of
information are, what is the intervening
material? So, in general, dependencies
don't cross over verbs, and commonly they
don't cross over punctuation. Some
exceptions, commas are quite often crossed over.
So, looking at the words in between can
give information about whether a
dependency is likely or not. A final
source of information is looking at the
valency of heads. And that's saying, for
a particular word, what kind of dependents
does it typically take? So a word like the
typically takes no dependents on the left
and no dependents on the right, as in
this case here. On the other hand, if you
have a word that is, say, a noun,
it will take dependents like adjectives
and articles on the left. But it won't
take those kind of dependents on the
right, though can take other kinds of
words as dependents on the right. For
example, take prepositional phrase
modifiers or relative clauses as dependents
on the right. So you can develop a quite
rich typology of what kind of dependents
words take. Okay that should give you a
better sense of what dependency
representations look like and it's the big
picture of how we go about parsing with
them. In the next segment we'll introduce
a concrete algorithm for dependency parsing.
